




THE PRINCIPLES 
OF MATHEMATICS 



BY BERTRAND RUSSELL 


HUMAN SOCIETY IN ETHICS AND SOCIETY 
THE IMPACT OF SCIENCE ON SOCIETY 
NEW HOPES FOR A CHANCING WORLD 
HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 1 ITS SCOPE AND LIMITS 
HISTORY OP WESTERN PHILOSOPHY 
THE PRINCIPLES OP MATHEMATICS 
INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL PHILOSOPHY 
THE ANALYSIS OF MIND 
OUR KNOWLEDGE OP THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
AN OUTLINE OP PHILOSOPHY 
THE PHILOSOPHY OP LIEBNIZ 
AN INQUIRY INTO MEANING AND TRUTH 
AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 

(The First Keith Lectures) 

THE ANALYSIS OP MATTER 
PR I NCI PI A MATHEMATICA 
THE PROBLEMS OP PHILOSOPHY 
LOGIC AND KNOWLEDGE 

PORTRAITS FROM MEMORY 
POWER 

IN PRAISE OF IDLENESS 
THE CONQUEST OF HAPPINESS 
SCEPTICAL ESSAYS 
MYSTICISM AND LOGIC 
UNPOPULAR ESSAYS 
THE SCIENTIFIC OUTLOOK 
MARRIAGE AND MORALS 
EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 
ON EDUCATION 

FREEDOM AND ORGANIZATION, 1S14-IQX4 
PRINCIPLES OF SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTION 
ROADS TO FREEDOM 

THE PRACTICE AND THEORY OF BOLSHEVISM 



THE PRINCIPLES 
OF MATHEMATICS 


BERTRAND RUSSELL 


LONDON 

GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 
MUSEUM STREET 



FIRST PUBLISHED I 903 
SECOND EDITION X 927 
REPRINTED 194^1 194®* I95<> AND 195* 
SEVENTH IMPRESSION 1956 


PRINTED IN 


GREAT 


BRITAIN 

. LONDON, W.C.I 


BY BRADFORD AND DICKENS 



INTRODUCTION TO THE 
SECOND EDITION 


4 rpHE Principles of Mathematics ” was published in 1903, and most of 
X it was written in 1900. In the subsequent years the subjects of 
which it treats haveHteen widely discussed, and the technique of 
mathematical logic has been greatly improved ; while some new problems 
have arisen, some old ones have been solved, and others, though they 
remain in a controversial condition, have taken on completely new forms. 
In these circumstances, it seemed useless to attempt to amend this or 
that, in the book, which no longer expresses my present views. Such 
interest as the book now possesses is historical, and consists in the fact 
that it represents a certain stage in the development of its subject. I 
have therefore altered nothing, but shall endeavour, in this Introduction, 
to say in what respects I adhere to the opinions which it expresses, land 
in what other respects subsequent research seems to me to have shown 
them to be erroneous. 

The fundamental thesis of the following pages, that mathematics and 
logic are identical, is one which I have never since seen any reason to 
modify. This thesis was, at first, unpopular, because logic is traditionally 
associated with philosophy and Aristotle, so that mathematicians felt it 
to be none of their business, and those who considered themselves 
logicians resented being asked to master a new and rather difficult 
mathematical technique. But such feelings would have had no lasting 
influence if they had been unable to find support in more serious reasons 
for doubt. These reasons are, broadly speaking, of two opposite kinds : 
first, that there are certain unsolved difficulties in mathematical logic, 
which make it appear less certain than mathematics is believed to be ; 
and secondly that, if the logical basis of mathematics is accepted, it 
justifies, or tends to justify, much work, such as that of Georg Carift0pi , 
which is viewed with suspicion by many mathematicians on account of 
the unsolved paradoxes which it shares with logic. These two opposite 
lines of criticism are represented by the formalists, led by Hilbert, and 
the intuitionists, led by Brouwer. 

The formalist interpretation of mathematics is by no means new, but 
for our purposes we may ignore its older forms. As presented by Hilbert, 
for example in the sphere of number, it consists in leaving the integers 
undefined, but asserting concerning them such axioms as shall make 



VI 


Introduction 


possible the deduction of the usual arithmetical propositions* That is 
to say, we do not assign any meaning to our symbols 0, 1, 2, . . except 
that they are to have certain properties enumerated in the axioms. 
These symbols are, therefore, to be regarded as variables. The later 
integers may be defined when 0 is given, but 0 is to be merely something 
having the assigned characteristics. Accordingly the symbols 0, 1, 2, . . . 
do not represent one definite series, but any progression whatever. The 
formalists have forgotten that numbers are needed, not only for doing 
sums, but for counting. Such propositions as “ There were 12 Apostles ” 
or “ London has 6,000,000 inhabitants ” cannot be interpreted in their 
system. For the symbol 14 0 ” may be taken to mean any finite integer, 
without thereby making any of Hilbert’s axioms false ; and thus every 
number-symbol becomes infinitely ambiguous. The formalists are like 
a watchmaker who is so absorbed in making his watches look pretty that 
he has forgotten their purpose of telling the time, and has therefore 
omitted to insert any works. 

There is another difficulty in the formalist position, and that is as 
regards existence. Hilbert assumes that if a set of axioms does not lead 
to a contradiction, there must be some set of objects which satisfies the 
axioms ; accordingly, in place of seeking to establish existence theorem? 
by producing an instance, he devotes himself to methods of proving the 
self-consistency of his axioms. For him, 44 existence/’ as usually under- 
stood, is an unnecessarily metaphysical concept, which should be replaced 
by the precise conoept of non-contradiction. Here, again, he has 
forgotten that arithmetic has practical uses. There is no limit to the 
systems of non-contradictory axioms that might be invented. Our 
reasons for being specially interested in the axioms that lead to ordinary 
arithmetic lie outside arithmetic, and have to do with the application of 
number to empirical material. This application itself forms no part of 
either logic or arithmetic ; but a theory which makes it a priori impossible 
cannot be right. The logical definition of numbers makes their con- 
nection with the actual world of countable objects intelligible ; the 
formalist theory does not. 

The intuitionist theory, represented first by Brouwer and later by 
Weyl, is a more serious matter. There is a philosophy associated with 
the theory, which, for our purposes, we may ignore ; it is only its bearing 
on logic and mathematics that concerns us. The essential point here is 
the refusal to regard a proposition as either true or false unless some 
method exists of deciding the alternative. Brouwer denies the law of 
excluded middle where no such method exists. This destroys, for 
example, the proof that there are more real numbers than rational 
numbers, and that, in the series of real numbers, every progression has a 
limit. Consequently large parts of analysis, which for centuries have 
been thought well established, are rendered doubtful. 

Associated with this theory is the doctrine called finitism, which 
calls in question propositions involving infinite collection* or infinite 
series, on the ground that such propositions are un verifiable. This 



Introduction 


vti 


doctrine is an aspect of thorough-going empiricism, and must, if taken 
seriously, have consequences even more destructive than those that are 
recognized by its advocates. Men, for example, though they form a 
finite class, are, practically and empirically, just as impossible to enumerate 
as if their number were infinite. If the finitist’s principle is admitted, 
we must not make any general statement — such as “ All men are mortal ” 
— about a collection defined by its properties, not by actual mention of 
all its members. This would make a clean sweep of all science and of all 
mathematics, not only of the partB which the intuitionists consider 
questionable. Disastrous consequences, however, cannot be regarded as 
proving that a doctrine is false ; and the finitist doctrine, if it is to be 
disproved, can only be met by a complete theory of knowledge. I do 
not believe it to be true, but I think no short and easy refutation of it is 
possible. 

An excellent and very full discussion of the question whether mathe- 
matics and logic are identical will be found in Vol. III. of Jorgensen’s 
44 Treatise of Formal Logic,” pp. 57-200, where the reader will find a 
dispassionate examination of the arguments that have been adduced 
against this thesis, with a conclusion which is, broadly speaking, the 
same as mine, namely that, while quite new grounds have been given in 
recent years for refusing to reduce mathematics to logic, none of these 
grounds is in any degree conclusive. 

This brings me to the definition of mathematics which forms the first 
sentence of the 44 Principles.” In this definition various changes are 
necessary. To begin with, the form 44 p implies q ” is only one of many 
logical forms that mathematical propositions may take. I was originally 
led to emphasise this form by the consideration of Geometry. It was clear 
that Euclidean and non-Euclidean systems alike must be included in pure 
mathematics, and must not be regarded as mutually inconsistent ; we 
must, therefore, only assert that the axioms imply the propositions, not 
that the axioms are true and therefore the propositions are true. 8uch 
instances led me to lay undue stress on implication, which is only one 
among truth-functions, and no more important than the others. Next : 
when it is said that 44 p and q are propositions containing one or more 
variables,” it would, of course, be more correct to say that they are 
propositional functions ; what is said, however, may be excused on the 
ground that propositional functions had not yet been defined, and were not 
yet familiar to logicians or mathematicians. 

I come next to a more serious matter, namely the statement that 
44 neither p nor q contains any constants except logical constants.” I 
postpone, for the moment, the discussion as to what logical constants are. 
Assuming this known, my present point is that the absence of non-k)gical 
constants, though a necessary condition for the mathematical character of 
a proposition, is not a sufficient condition. Of this, perhaps, the best 
examples are statements concerning the number of things in the world* 
Take, say : 44 There are at least three things in the world.” This is 
equivalent to : 44 Thereexist objects x 9 y f z, and properties % x* #uch that 



Introduction 


• • • 

Vlll 

x but not y has the property <p,x but not z has the property y>, and y but not z 
has the property x ” This statement can be enunciated in purely logical 
terms, and it can be logically proved to be true of classes of classes of classes : 
of these there must, in fact, be at least 4, even if the universe did not exist. 
For in that case there would be one class, the null-class ; two classes of 
classes, namely, the class of no classes and the class whose only member is the 
null class ; and four classes of classes of classes, namely the one which is 
null, the one whose only member is the null class of classes, the one whose 
only member is the class whose only member is the null class, and the one 
which is the sum of the two last. But in the lower types, that of individuals, 
that of classes, and that of classes of classes, we cannot logically prove 
that there are at least three members. From the very nature of logic, 
something of this sort is to be expected ; for logic aims at independence 
of empirical fact, and the existence of the universe is an empirical fact. 
It is true that if the world did not exist, logic-books would not exist ; but 
the existence of logic-books is not one of the premisses of logic, nor can it 
be inferred from any proposition that has a right to be in a logic-book. 

In practice, a great deal of mathematics is possible without assuming 
the existence of anything. All the elementary arithmetic of finite integers 
and rational fractions can be constructed ; but whatever involves infinite 
classes of integers becomes impossible. This excludes real numbers and 
the whole of analysis. To include them, we need the “ axiom of infinity,” 
which states that, if n is any finite number, there is at least one class having 
n members. At the time when I wrote the “ Principles,” I supposed that 
this could be proved, but by the time that Dr. Whitehead and I published 
“ Principia Mathematical we had become convinced that the supposed 
proof was fallacious. 

The above argument depends upon the doctrine of types, which, although 
it occurs in a crude form in Appendix B of the “ Principles,” had not yet 
reached the stage of development at which it showed that the existence of 
infinite classes cannot be demonstrated logically. What is said as to 
existence-theorems in the last paragraph of the last chapter of the 
“ Principles ” (pp. 497-8) no longer appears to me to be valid : such 
existence-theorems, with certain exceptions, are, I should now say, examples 
of propositions which can be enunciated in logical terms, but can only be 
proved or disproved by empirical evidence. 

Another example is the multiplicative axiom, or its equivalent, 
Zermelo s axiom of selection. This asserts that, given a set of mutually 
exclusive classes, none of which is null, there is at least one class consisting 
of one representative from each class of the set. Whether this is true or 
not, no one knows. It is easy to imagine universes in which it would be 
true, and it is impossible to prove that there are possible universes in which 
it would be false ; but it is also impossible (at least, so I believe) to prove 
that there are no possible universes in which it would be false. I did not 
become aware of the necessity for this axiom until a year after the 
“ Principles ” was published. This book contains, in consequence, certain 
errors, for example the assertion, in $119 (p. 123), that the two definitions 



Introduction ix 

of infinity are equivalent, which can only be proved if the multiplicative 
akiom is assumed. 

Such examples — which might be multiplied indefinitely — show that a 
proposition may satisfy the definition with which the “ Principles ” opens, 
and yet may be incapable of logical or mathematical proof or disproof. 
All mathematical propositions are included under the definition (with 
certain minor emendations), but not all propositions that are included are 
mathematical. In order that a proposition may belong to mathematics 
it must have a further property: according to some it must be 
“ tautological,” and according to Carnap it must be “ analytic.” It is by 
no means easy to get an exact definition of this characteristic ; moreover, 
Carnap has shown that it is necessary to distinguish between “ analytic ” 
and “ demonstrable,” the latter beiiig a somewhat narrower concept. 
And the question whether a proposition is or is not “ analytic,” or 
“ demonstrable ” depends upon the apparatus of premisses with which we 
begin. Unless, therefore, we have some criterion as to admissible logical 
premisses, the whole question as to what are logical propositions becomes 
to a very considerable extent arbitraiy. This is a veiy unsatisfactory 
conclusion, and I do not accept it as final. But before anything more can 
be said on this subject, it is necessary to discuss the question of “ logical 
constants,” which play an essential part in the definition of mathematics 
in the first sentence of the “ Principles.” 

There are three questions in regard to logical constants : First, are there 
such things ? Second, how are they defined ? Third, do they occur in 
the propositions of logic ? Of these questions, the first and third are highly 
ambiguous, but their various meanings can be made clearer by a little 
discussion. 

First : Are there logical constants ? There is one sense of this question 
in which we can give a perfectly definite affirmative answer : in the linguistic 
or symbolic expression of logical propositions, there are words or symbols 
which play a constant part, i.e. f make the same contribution to the sig- 
nificance of propositions wherever they occur. Such are, for example, 
“ or,” “ and,” " not,” “ if-then,” “ the null-class,” “ 0,” 41 1,” “ 2,” . . . 
The difficulty is that, when we analyse the propositions in the written 
expression of which such symbols occur, we find that they have no 
constituents corresponding to the expressions in question. In some cases 
this is fairly obvious : not even the most ardent Plat&nist would suppose 
that the perfect “ or ” is laid up in heaven, and that the “ cr’s ” here on 
earth are imperfect copies of the celestial archetype. But in the case of 
numbers this is far less obvious. The doctrines of Pythagoras, which began 
with arithmetical mysticism, influenced all subsequent philosophy and 
mathematics more profoundly than is generally realized. Numbers were 
immutable and eternal, like the heavenly bodies ; numbers were intelligible : 
the science of numbers was the key to the universe. The last of these 
beliefs has misled mathematicians and the Board of Education down 
to the present day. Consequently, to say that numbers are symbols 
which mean nothing appears as a horrible form of atheism. (AX the time 



X 


Introduction 


when I wrote the “ Principle/’ 1 shared with Frege a belief in the Platonic 
reality of numbers, which, in my imagination, peopled the timeless realm 
of Being. It was a comforting faith, which I later abandoned with regret. 
Something must now be said of the steps by which I was led to abandon it.] 

In Chapter IV of the “ Principles ” it is said that 44 every word 
occurring in a sentence must have some meaning ” ; and again “ Whatever 
may be an object of thought, or may occur in any true or false proposition, 
or can be counted as one , 1 call a term. ... A man, a moment, a number, 
a class, a relation, a chinuera, or anytliing else that can be mentioned, 
is sure to be a term ; and to deny that such and such a thing is a term 
must always be false.” This way of understanding language turned out 
to be mistaken. That a word “ must have some meaning ” — the w6rd, 
of course, being not gibberish, but one which has an intelligible use — 
is not always true if taken as applying to the word in isolation. What is 
true is that the word contributes to the meaning of the sentence in 
which it occurs ; but that is a very different matter. 

The first step in the process was the theory of descriptions. According 
to this theory, in the proposition " Scott is the author of Waverley,” 
there is no constituent corresponding to “ the author of Waverley ” : 
the analysis of the proposition is, roughly : “ Scott wrote Waverley, and 
whoever wrote Waverley was Scott ” ; or, more accurately : “The pro- 
positional function 4 x wrote Waverley is equivalent to x is Scott * is true 
for all values of x .” ^This theory swept away the contention — advanced, 
for instance, by Meinong — that there must, in the realm of Being, be such 
objects as the golden mountain and the round square, since we can talk 
about them.^ “ The round square does not exist ” had always been a 
difficult proposition ; for it was natural to ask 11 What is it that does not 
exist ? ” and any possible answer had seemed to imply that, in some 
sense, there is such an object as the round square, though this object has 
the odd property of not existing. The theory of descriptions avoided 
this and other difficulties. 

The next step was the abolition of classes. This step was taken in 
41 Principia Mathematics, ” where it is said : “ The symbols for classes, 
like those for descriptions, are, in ou$ system, incomplete symbols ; 
their uses are defined, but they themselves are not assumed to mean 
anything at all. . . . Thus classes, so far as we introduce them, are merely 
symbolic or linguistic conveniences, not genuine objects ” ( Vol. I, pp. 71-2). 
Seeing that cardinal numbers had been defined as classes of classes, they 
also became “ merely symbolic or linguistic conveniences.” Thus, for 
example, the proposition “ 1+1 — 2,” somewhat simplified, becomes the 
following : “ Form the propositional function * a is not b, and whatever 
x may be, x is a y is always equivalent toxisaorzisb'; form also the 
propositional function 4 a is a y, and, whatever x may be, x is a y but is 
not a is always equivalent to x is b.” Then, whatever y may be, the 
assertion that one of these propositional functions is not always false 
(for different values of a and b) is equivalent to the assertion that the other 
is not always false.” Here the numbers 1 and 2 have entirely disappeared, 
and a similar analysis can be applied to any arithmetical proposition. 



Introduction 


xi 


Dr. Whitehead, at this stage, persuaded me to abandon points of 
space, instants of time, and particles of matter, substituting for them 
logical constructions composed of events. In the end, it seemed to 
result that none of the raw material of the world has smooth logical 
properties, but that whatever appears to have such properties is con- 
structed artificially in order to have them. I do not mean that statements 
apparently about points or instants or numbers, or any of the other 
entities* which Occam’s razor abolishes, are false, but only that they need 
interpretation which shows that their linguistic form is misleading, and 
that, when they are rightly analysed, the pseudo-entities in question are 
found to be not mentioned in them. “ Time consists of instants,” for 
example, may or may not be a true statement, but in either case it 
mentions neither time nor instants. It may, roughly, be interpreted 
as follows : Given any event x , let us define as its “ contemporaries ” 
those which end after it begins, but begin before it ends ; and among 
these let us define as “ initial contemporaries ” of x those which are not 
wholly later than any other contemporaries of x. Then the statement 
“ time consists of instants ” is true if, given any event x, every event 
which is wholly later than some contemporary of x is wholly later than 
some initial contemporary of x. A similar process of interpretation is 
necessary in regard to most, if not all, purely logical constants. 

Thus the question whether logical constants occur in the propositions 
of logic becomes more difficult than it seemed at first sight. It is, in 
fact, a question to which, as things stand, no definite answer can be given, 
because there is no exact definition of “ occurring in ” a proposition. 
But something can be said. In the first place, no proposition of logic 
can mention any particular object. The statement “ If Socrates is a man 
and all men are mortal, then Socrates is mortal ” is not a proposition of 
logic ; the logical proposition of which the above is a particular case is : 
“ If x has the property of <p t and whatever has the property y has the 
property y>, then x has the property whatever x, <p, y> may be.” The 
word “ property,” which occurs here, disappears from the correct 
symbolic statement of the proposition ; but “ if-then / 9 or something 
serving the same purpose, remains. After the utmost efforts to reduce 
the number of undefined elements in the logical calculus, we shall find 
ourselves left with two (at least) which seem indispensable : one is 
incompatibility ; the other is the truth of ail values of a propositional 
function. (By the “ incompatibility ” of two propositions is meant that 
they are not both true.) Neither of these looks very substantial. What 
was said earlier about “ or ” applies equally to incompatibility ; and it 
would seem absurd to say that generality is a constituent of a general 
proposition. 

Logical constants, therefore, if we are to be able to say anything 
definite about them, must be treated as part of the language, not as part of 
what the language speaks about. In this way, logic becomes much more 
linguis tic than I believed it to be at the time when I wrote the 
“ Principles.” It will still be true that no constants except logical 



xii Introduction 

constants occur in the verbal or symbolic expression of logical propositions, 
but it will not be true that these logical constants are names of objects, 
as “ Socrates ” is intended to be. 

To define logic, or mathematics, is therefore by no means easy except 
in relation to some given set of premisses. A logical premiss must have 
certain characteristics which can be defined : it must have complete 
generality, in the sense that it mentions no particular thing or quality ; 
and it must be true in virtue of its form. Given a definite set of logical 
premisses, we- can define logic, in relation to them , as whatever they 
enable us to demonstrate. But (1) it is hard to say what makes a 
proposition true in virtue of its form ; (2) it is difficult to see any way of 
proving that the system resulting from a given set of premisses is 
complete, in the sense of embracing everything that we should wish 
to include among logical propositions. As regards this second point, it 
has been customary to accept current logic and mathematics as a datum, 
and seek the fewest premisses from which this datum can be reconstructed. 
But when doubts arise — as they have arisen — concerning the validity of 
certain parts of mathematics, this method leaves us in the lurch. * 

It seems clear that there must be some way of defining logic otherwise 
than in relation to a particular logical language. The fundamental 
characteristic of logic, obviously, is that which is indicated when we say 
that logical propositions are true in virtue of their form. The question of 
demonstrability cannot enter in, since every proposition which, in one 
system, is deduced from the premisses, might, in another system, be 
itself taken as a premiss. If the proposition is complicated, this is 
inconvenient, but it cannot be impossible. All the propositions that 
are demonstrable in any admissible logical system must share with the 
premisses the property of being true in virtue of their form ; and all 
propositions which are true in virtue of their form ought to be included in 
any adequate logic. Some writers, for example Carnap in his “ Logical 
Syntax of Language,” treat the whole problem as being more a matter of 
liguistic choice than I can believe it to be. In the above-mentioned work, 
Carnap has two logical languages, one of which admits the multiplicative 
axiom and the axiom of infinity/ while the other does not. I cannot 
myself regard such a matter as one to be decided by our arbitrary choice. 
It seems to me that these axioms either do, or do not, have the character- 
istic of formal truth which characterizes logic, and that in the former 
event every logic must include them, while in the latter every logic 
must exclude them. I confess, however, that I am unable to give any 
clear account of what is meant by saying that a proposition is “ true in 
virtue of its form.” But this phrase, inadequate as it is, points, I think, 
to the problem which must be solved if an adequate definition of logic 
is to be found. 

I come finally to the question of the contradictions and the doctrine 
of types. Henri Poincar^, who considered mathematical logic to be 
no help in discovery, and therefore sterile, rejoiced in the contradictions : 
“ La logistique n’est plus sterile ; elle engendre la contradiction ! ” 



Introduction 


* • * 
XIII 

All that mathematical logic did, however, waa to make it evident that 
contradictions follow from premisses previously accepted by all logicians, 
however innocent of mathematics. Nor were the contradictions all new ; 
some dated from Greek times. 

In the “ Principles,” only three contradictions are mentioned : 
Burali Forti’s concerning the greatest ordinal, the contradiction con- 
cerning the greatest cardinal, and mine concerning the classes that are 
not members of themselves (pp. 323, 366, and 101). What is said as to 
possible solutions may be ignored, except Appendix B, on the theory 
of types ; and this itself is only a rough sketch. The literature on the 
contradictions is vast, and the subject is still controversial. The most 
complete treatment of the subject known to me is to be found in Carnap’s 
“ Logical Syntax of Language ” (Kegan Paul, 1937). What he says 
on the subject seems to me either right or so difficult to refute that a 
refutation could not possibly be attempted in a short space. 1 shall, 
therefore, confine myself to a few general remarks. 

At first sight, the contradictions seem to be of three sorts : those that 
are mathematical, those that are logical, and those that may be suspected 
of being due to some more or less trivial linguistic trick. Of the definitely 
mathematical contradictions, those concerning the greatest ordinal and 
the greatest cardinal may be taken as typical. 

The first of these, Burali Forti’B, is as follows : Let us arrange all 
ordinal numbers in order of magnitude ; then the last of these, which we 
will call N, is the greatest of ordinals. But the number of all ordinals 
from 0 up to N is N-f 1, which is greater than N. We cannot escape 
by suggesting that the series of ordinal numbers has no last term ; for in 
that case equally this series itself has an ordinal number greater than any 
term of the series, i,e. 9 greater than any ordinal number. 

The second contradiction, that concerning the greatest cardinal, has 
the merit of making peculiarly evident the need for some doctrine of 
types. We know from elementary arithmetic that the number of 
combinations of n things any number at a time is 2”, t.e., that a class 
of n terms lias 2 n sub-classes. We can prove that this proposition 
remains true when n is infinite. And Cantor proved that 2* is always 
greater than n. Hence there can be no greatest cardinal. Yet one would 
have supposed tliat the class containing everything would have the 
greatest possible number of terms. Since, however, tlie number of 
classes of tilings exceeds the number of tilings, clearly classes of things 
are not tilings. (1 will explain shortly wliat this statement can mean.) 

Of the obviously logical contradictions, one is discussed in Chapter X ; 
in the linguistic group, the most famous, tliat of the liar, was invented by 
the Greeks. It is as follows : Suppose a man says “ I am lying.” If lie 
is lying, his statement is true, and tlierefore lie is not lying ; if he is not 
lying, then, when lie says he is lying, he is lying. Thus either hypothesis 
implies its contradictory. 

' The logical and mathematical contradictions, as might be expected, 
are not- really distinguishable ; but the linguistic group, according to 



XIV 


Introduction 


Ramsey*, can be solved by what may be called, in a broad sense, linguistic 
considerations. They are distinguished from the logical group by the 
fact that they introduce empirical notions, such as what somebody asserts 
or means ; and since these notions are not logical, it is possible to find 
solutions which depend upon other than logical considerations. This 
renders possible a great simplification of the theory of types, which, as 
it emerges from Ramsey’s discussion, ceases wholly to appear unplausible 
or artificial or a mere ad hoc hypothesis designed to avoid the 
contradictions. 

The technical essence of the theory of types is merely this : Given 
a propositional function “ qpx ” of which all values are true, there are 
expressions which it is not legitimate to substitute for “ x” For example: 
All values of " if x is a man x is a mortal ” are true, and we can infer 
"if Socrates is a man, Socrates is a mortal” ; but we cannot infer "if the 
law of contradiction is a man, the law of contradiction is a mortal.” 
The theory of types declares this latter set of words to be nonsense, and 
gives rules as to permissible values of “ x ” in “ <px In the detail 
there are difficulties and complications, but the general principle is 
merely a more precise form of one tliat has always been recognized. 
In the older conventional logic, it was customary to point out that such 
a form of words as " virtue is triangular ” is neither true nor false, but 
no attempt was made to arrive at a definite set of rules for deciding whether 
a given Beiies of words was or was not significant. This the theory of types 
achieves. Thus, for example I stated above that " classes of things are 
not things.” This will mean : “ If ‘ x is a member of the class a ’ is a 
proposition, and ‘ <px ’ is a proposition, then * (pa ’ is not a proposition, 
but a meaningless collection of symbols.” 

There are still many controversial questions in mathematical logic, 
which, in the above pageB, I have made no attempt to solve. I have 
mentioned only those matters as to which, in my opinion, there has been 
some fairly definite advance since the time when the ” Principles ” was 
written. Broadly speaking, I still think this book is in the right where it 
disagrees with what had been previously held, but where it agrees with 
older theories it is apt to be wrong. The changes in philosophy which 
seem to me to be called for are partly due to the technical advances of 
mathematical logic in the intervening thirty -four years, which have 
simplified the apparatus of primitive ideas and propositions, and Ixave 
swept away many apparent entities, such as classes, points, and instants. 
Broadly, the result is an outlook which is less Platonic, or less realist in the 
mediaeval sense of the word. How far it is possible to go in the direction 
of nominalism remains, to my mind, an unsolved question, but one which, 
whether completely soluble or not, can only be adequately investigated 
by means of mathematical logic. 


Foundations of Mathematics. Kegan Paul, 1931* p* 20 IT. 



PREFACE. 


T HE present work has two main objects. One of these, the proof 
that all pure mathematics deals exclusively with concepts definable 
in terms of a very small number of fundamental logical concepts, and 
that all its propositions are deducible from a very small number of 
fundamental logical principles, is undertaken in Parts II. — VII. of this 
Volume, and will be established by strict symbolic reasoning in Volume n. 
The demonstration of this thesis has, if I am not mistaken, all the 
certainty and precision of which mathematical demonstrations are capable. 
As the thesis is very recent among mathematicians, and is almost 
universally denied by philosophers, I have undertaken, in this volume, 
to defend its various parts, as occasion arose, against such adverse 
theories as appeared most widely held or most difficult to disprove. 
I have also endeavoured to present, in language as untechnical as 
possible, the more important stages in the deductions by which the 
thesis is established. 

The other object of this work, which occupies Part I., is the 
explanation of the fundamental concepts which mathematics accepts 
as indefinable. This is a purely philosophical task, and I cannot flatter 
myself that I have done more than indicate a vast field of inquiry, and 
give a sample of the methods by which the inquiry may be conducted. 
The discussion of indefinables — which forms the chief part of philosophical 
logic— is the endeavour to see clearly, and to make others see clearly, 
the entities concerned, in order that the mind may have that kind of 
acquaintance with them which it has with redness or the taste of a 
pineapple. Where, as in the present case, the indefinables are obtained 
primarily as the necessary residue in a process of analysis, it is often 
easier to know that there must be such entities than actually to perceive 
them ; there is a process analogous to that which resulted in the discovery 
of Neptune, with the difference that the final stage— the search with a 
mental telescope for the entity which has been inferred— is often the 
most difficult part of the undertaking. In the case of classes, I must 
confess, I have failed to perceive any concept fulfilling the conditions 



xvi Preface 

requisite for the notion of class . And the contradiction discussed in 
Chapter x. proves that something is amiss, but what this is I have 
hitherto failed to discover. 

The second volume, in which I have had the great good fortune 
to secure the collaboration of Mr A. N. Whitehead, will be addressed 
exclusively to mathematicians; it will contain chains of deductions, 
from the premisses of symbolic logic through Arithmetic, finite and 
infinite, to Geometry, in an order similar to that adopted in the present 
volume ; it will also contain various original developments, in which the 
method of Professor Peano, as supplemented by the Logic of Relations, 
has shown itself a powerful instrument of mathematical investigation 

The present volume, which may be regarded either as a commentary 
upon, or as an introduction to, the second volume, is addressed in equal 
measure to the philosopher and to the mathematician ; but some parts 
will be more interesting to the one, others to the other. I should advise 
mathematicians, unless they are specially interested in Symbolic Logic, 
to begin with Part IV., and only refer to earlier parts as occasion arises. 
The following portions are more specially philosophical : Part I. 
(omitting Chapter 11 .) ; Part II., Chapters xi., xv., xvi., xvn.; Part III.; 
Part IV., §5207, Chapters xxvi., xxvu., xxxi.; Part V., Chapters xu., 
xi.ii., xliii.; Part VI., Chapters l., li., ui.; Part VII., Chapters liii., 
mv., lv., lvil, lviil; and the two Appendices, which belong to Part I., 
and should be read in connection with it. Professor Frege's work, which 
largely anticipates my own, was for the most part unknown to me when 
the printing of the present work began ; I had seen his Grundgesctze 
der Arithmetik , but, owing to the great difficulty of his symbolism, I had 
failed to grasp its importance or to understand its contents. The only 
method, at so late a stage, of doing justice to his work, was to devote 
an Appendix to it; and in some points the views contained in the 
Appendix differ from those in Chapter vi„ especially in §§71, 73, 74. 
On questions discussed in these sections, I discovered errors after passing 
the sheets for the press ; these errors, of which the chief are the denial 
of the null-class, and the identification of a term with the class whose 
only member it is, arc rectified in the Appendices. The subjects 
treated are so difficult that I feel little confidence in my present 
opinions, and regard any conclusions which may be advocated as 
essentially hypotheses. 

A few words as to the origin of the present work may serve to 
show the importance of the questions discussed. About six years ago, 
I began an investigation into the philosophy of Dynamics. I was 
met by the difficulty that, when a particle is subject to several forces. 



Preface xvii 

no one of the component accelerations actually occurs, but only 
the resultant acceleration, of which they are not parts; this fact 
rendered illusory such causation of particulars by particulars as is 
affirmed, at first sight, by the law of gravitation. It appeared also that 
the difficulty in regard to absolute motion is insoluble on a relational 
theory of space. From these two questions I was led to a re-examination 
of the principles of Geometry, thence to the philosophy of continuity 
and infinity, and thence, with a view to discovering the meaning of the 
word any , to Symbolic Logic. The final outcome, as regards the 
philosophy of Dynamics, is perhaps rather slender ; the reason of this 
is, that almost all the problems of Dynamics appear to me empirical, 
and therefore outside the scope of such a work as the present. Many 
very interesting questions have had to be omitted, especially in Parts 
VI. and VII., as not relevant to my purpose, which, for fear of 
misunderstandings, it may be well to explain at this stage. 

•When actual objects are counted, or when Geometry and Dynamics 
are applied to actual space or actual matter, or when, in any other way, 
mathematical reasoning is applied to what exists, the reasoning employed 
has a form not dependent upon the objects to which it is applied being 
just those objects that they are, but only upon their having certain 
general properties.- In pure mathematics, actual objects in the world 
of existence will never be in question, but only hypothetical objects 
having those general properties upon which depends whatever deduction 
is being considered; and these general properties will always be 
expressible in terms of the fundamental concepts which I have called 
logical constants. Thus when space or motion is spoken of in pure 
mathematics, it is not actual space or actual motion, as we know them 
in experience, that are spoken of, but any entity possessing those abstract 
general properties of space or motion that are employed in the reasonings 
of geometry or dynamics. The question whether these properties belong, 
as a matter of fact, to actual space or actual motion, is irrelevant to pure 
mathematics, and therefore to the present work, being, in my opinion, 
a purely empirical question, to be investigated in the laboratory or the 
observatory. Indirectly, it is true, the discussions connected with pure 
mathematics have a very important bearing upon such empirical questions* 
since mathematical space and motion are held by many, perhaps most, 
philosophers to be self-contradictory, and therefore necessarily different 
from actual space and motion, whereas, if the views advocated in the 
following pages be valid, no such self-contradictions are to be found in 
mathematical space and motion. But extra-mathematical considerations 
of this kind have been almost wholly excluded from the present work* 



xviii Preface 

On fundamental questions of philosophy, my position, in all its chief 
features, is derived from Mr G. E. Moore. I have accepted from him 
the non-existential nature of propositions (except such as happen to 
assert existence) and their independence of any knowing mind; also 
the pluralism which regards the world, both that of existents and 
that of entities, as composed of an infinite number of mutually 
independent entities, with relations which are ultimate, and not 
reducible to adjectives of their terms or of the whole which these 
compose. Before learning these views from him, I found myself 
completely unable to construct any philosophy of arithmetic, whereas 
their acceptance brought about an immediate liberation from a large 
number of difficulties which I believe to be otherwise insuperable. 
The doctrines just mentioned are, in my opinion, quite indispensable 
to any even tolerably satisfactory philosophy of mathematics, as I hope 
the following pages will show. But I must leave it to my readers to 
judge how far the reasoning assumes these doctrines, and how far it 
supports them. Formally, my premisses are simply assumed; but the 
fact that they allow mathematics to be true, which most current 
philosophies do not, is surely a powerful argument in their favour. 

In Mathematics, my chief obligations, as is indeed evident, are to 
Georg Cantor and Professor Peano. If I had become acquainted 
sooner with the work of Professor Frege, I should have owed a 
great deal to him, but as it is I arrived independently at many 
results which he had already established. At every stage of my work, 
I have been assisted more than I can express by the suggestions, the 
criticisms, and the generous encouragement of Mr A. N. Whitehead; 
he also has kindly read my proofs, and greatly improved the final 
expression of a very large number of passages. Many useful hints 
I owe also to Mr W. E. Johnson ; and in the more philosophical parts 
of the book I owe much to Mr G. E. Moore besides the general position 
which underlies the whole. 

In the endeavour to cover so wide a field, it has been impossible to 
acquire an exhaustive knowledge of the literature. There are doubtless 
many important works with which I am unacquainted ; but where the 
labour of thinking and writing necessarily absorbs so much time, such 
ignorance, however regrettable, seems not wholly avoidable. 

Many words will be found, in the course of discussion, to be defined 
in senses apparently departing widely from common usage. Such 
departures, I must ask the reader to believe, are never wanton, but have 
hem made with great reluctance. In philosophical matters, they have 
been necessitated mainly by two causes. First, it often happens that 



xix 


Preface 

two cognate uotions are both to be considered, and that language has 
two names for the one, but none for the other. It is then highly 
convenient to distinguish between the two names commonly used as 
synonyms, keeping one for the usual, the other for the hitherto nameless 
sense. The other cause arises from philosophical disagreement with 
received views. Where two qualities are commonly supposed inseparably 
conjoined, but are here regarded as separable, the name which has 
applied to their combination will usually have to be restricted to one 
or other. For example, propositions are commonly regarded as (1) true 
or false, (2) mental. Holding, as I do, that what is true or false is not 
in general mental, I require a name for the true or false as such, and 
this name can scarcely be other than proposition . In such a case, the 
departure from usage is in no degree arbitrary. As regards mathematical 
terms, the necessity for establishing the existence-theorem in each case — 
t.i. the proof that there are entities of the kind in question — has led to 
many definitions which appear widely different from the notions usually 
attached to the terms in question. Instances of this are the definitions 
of cardinal, ordinal And complex numbers. In the two former of these, 
and in many other cases, the definition as a class, derived from the 
principle of abstraction, is mainly recommended by the fact that it 
leaves no doubt as to the existence-theorem. But in many instances of 
such apparent departure from usage, it may be doubted whether more 
has been done than to give precision to a notion which had hitherto 
been more or less vague. 

For publishing a work containing so many unsolved difficulties, my 
apology is, that investigation revealed no near prospect of adequately 
resolving the contradiction discussed in Chapter x., or of acquiring a 
better insight into the nature of classes. The repeated discovery of errors 
in solutions which for a time had satisfied me caused these problems to 
appear such as would have been only concealed by ray seemingly satis- 
factory theories which a slightly longer reflection might have produced ; 
it seemed better, therefore, merely to state the difficulties, than to wait 
until I had become persuaded of the truth of some almost certainly 
erroneous doctrine. 

My thanks are due to the Syndics of the University Press, and to 
their Secretary, Mr R. T. Wright, for their kindness and courtesy 
in regard to the present volume. 

London, 

December, 1902. 




TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PAGS 

Introduction to the Second Edition v 

Prepack «... xy 

PART I 

THE INDEflNABLES OF MATHEMATICS. 
CHAPTER L 

DEFINITION OF PURE MATHEMATICS. 

1. Definition of pure mathematics 3 

2. The principles of mathematics are no longer controversial ... 3 

3. Pure mathematics uses only a few notions, and these are logical 

constants 4 

4. All pure mathematics follows formally from twenty premisses . . 4 

' 6. Asserts formal implications 6 

6. And employs variables 6 

7. Which may have any value without exception 6 

8. Mathematics deals with types of relations 7 

9. Applied mathematics is defined by the occurrence of constants which 

are not logical 8 

10. Relation of mathematics to logic 8 

CHAPTER II. 

SYMBOLIC LOGIC. 

11. Definition and scope of symbolic logic 10 

12. The indefinables of symbolic logic ..10 

13. Symbolic logic consists <of three parts . , . . ... 11 

A. The Proportional Caleulue. 

14. Definition 13 

15. Distinction between implication and formal implication ... 14 

16. Implication indefinable .• 14 

17. Two indefinables and ten primitive propositions in this calculus . . 16 

18. The ten primitive propositions . . 16 

19. Disjunction and negation defined . 17 



yyi { Table of Contents 

B. The Calculus qf' Classes. 

PACK 


20. Three new indefinable* ..... 18 

21. The relation of an individual to its class . . 19 

22. Propositional functions 19 

23. Hie notion of suck that ..... 20 

24. Two new primitive propositions .... 20 

25. Relation to propositional calculus ... 21 

20. Identity 23 

C. The Calculus of Relations . 

27. The logic of relations essential to mathematics 23 

28. New primitive propositions 24 

29. Relative products 25 

30. Relations with assigned domains .... 20 

1). Petinos Symbolic Logic . 

31. Mathematical and philosophical definitions . . 26 

32. Peano's iudefinables 27 

33. Elementary definitions 28 

34. Peano's primitive propositions .... 29 

&5. Negation and disjunction 31 

36. Existence and the null-class .... 32 


CHAPTER III. 

IMPLICATION AND FORMAL IMPLICATION. 


37. Meaning of implication 33 

38. Asserted and unasserted propositions 34 

39. Inference does not require two premisses 35 

40. Formal implication is to be interpreted extensionally .... 36 

41. The variable in a formal implication has an unrestricted field . . 36 

42. A formal implication is a single propositional function, not a relation 

of two 38 

43. Assertions 39 

44. Conditions that a term in an implication may be varied ... 39 

45. Formal implication involved in rules of inference .... 40 


CHAPTER IV. 

PROPER NAMES, ADJECTIVES AND VERBS. 


46. Proper names, adjectives and verbs distinguished .... 42 

47. Terms 43 

48. Tilings and concepts 44 

49. Concepts as such and as terms ........ 45 

50. Conceptual diversity 46 

51. Meaning and the subject-predicate logic 47 

52. Verbs and truth 47 

53. All verbs, except perhaps t*, express relations 49 

54. Relations per se and relating relations 49 

55. Relations are not particularized by their terms 50 



Table of Contents xxiii 


CHAPTER V. 

DENOTING. 

PAQH 

56. Definition of denoting 53 

57. Connection with subject-predicate propositions 54 

58. Denoting concepts obtained from predicates ..... 55 

59. Extensional account of all, every, any , a and Home .... 56 

60. Intensional account of the same 58 

61. Illustrations 59 

62. The difference between all, every , etc. lies in the objects denoted, not 

in the way of denoting them 61 

63. The notion of the and definition . 62 

64. The notion of the and identity 63 

65. Summary 64 


CHAPTER VI. 

CLASSES. 

66. Combination of intensional and extensions] standpoints required . 66 

67. Meaning of clam 07 

68. Intensional and extensional genesis of classes 67 

69. Distinctions overlooked by Peano 68 

70. The class as one and as many 08 

71. The notion of and 69 

72. All men is not analyzable into nil and men 72 

73. There are null class-concepts, but there is no null class ... 73 

74. The class as one, except when it has one term, is distinct from the 

class as many 76 

75. Every, any, a and Home each denote one object, hut an ambiguous one . 77 

76. The relation of a term to its class 77 

77. The relation of inclusion between classes 78 

78. The contradiction 79 

79. Summary 80 


CHAPTER VII. 

PROPOSITIONAL FUNCTIONS. 

80. Indefftiability of *uch that ,82 

81. Where a fixed relation to a fixed term is asserted, a propositional 

function can be analyzed into a variable subject and a constant 
assertion 83 

82. But this analysis is impossible in other cases ..... 84 

83. Variation of the concept in a proposition 86 

84. Relation of propositional functions to classes 88 

85. A propositional function is in general not analyzable into a constant 

and a variable element 88 



8S SSSSggSi? 


txiv 


Table of Contents 


CHAPTER VIII. 

THE VARIABLE. 

PA01S 

Nature of the variable 89 

Relation of the variable to any 89 

Formal and restricted variables 91 

Formal implication presupposes any .91 

Duality of any and same 92 

The class-concept propositional function is indefinable . . . , 92 

Other classes can be defined by means of such that .... 93 

Analysis of the variable 93 


CHAPTER IX. 

RELATIONS. 

Characteristics of relations 95 

Relations of terms to themselves 98 

The domain and the converse domain of a relation .... 97 

Logical sum, logical product and relative product of relations . . 98 

A relation is not a class of couples 99 

Relations of a relation to its terms 99 


CHAPTER X. 

THE CONTRADICTION. 

Consequences of the contradiction ,101 

Various statements of the contradiction 102 

An analogous generalized argument 102 

Variahle propositional functions are in general inadmissible . . 103 

The contradiction arises from treating as one a class which is ouly 

many 104 

Other primd facie possible solutions appear inadequate .... 105 

Summary of Part 1 108 



Table of Contents 


XXV 


PART II. 

NUMBER. 

CHAPTER XI. 

DEFINITION OF CARDINAL NUMBERS. 

*AGK 


107. Plan of Part II . Ill 

108. Mathematical meaning of definition Ill 

109. Definition of numbers by abstraction 112 

110. Objections to this definition 114 

111. Nominal definition of numbers 115 


CHAPTER XII. 

ADDITION AND MULTIPLICATION. 


112. Only integers to be considered at present 117 

113. Definition of arithmetical addition 117 

114. Dependence upon the logical addition of classes , » . . . 110. 

115. Definition of multiplication U9> 

116. Connection of addition, multiplication and exponentiation . . . 110 


CHAPTER XIII. 

FINITE AND INFINITE. 


117. Definition of finite and infinite 121 

118. Definition of oq 121 

119. Definition of finite numbers by mathematical induction . .123 



CHAPTER XIV. 



THEORY OF FINITE NUMBERS. 


120. 

Peano’s indefinables and primitive propositions . . . 

. 124 

121. 

Mutual independence of the latte 

. . 124 

122. 

Peano really defines progressions, not finite numbers . 

124 

123. 

Proof of Peano's primitive propositions .... 

. . 127 



XXVI 


Table of Contents 


CHAPTER XV. 

ADDITION OF TERMS AND ADDITION OF CLASSES. 

PA«E 

124. Philosophy and mathematics distinguished 129 

125. Is there a more fundamental sense of number than that defined above? 130 


126. Numbers must be classes 131 

127. Numbers apply to classes as many 132 

128. One is to be asserted, not of terms, but of unit classes . . . 132 

129. Counting not fundamental in arithmetic 133 

130. Numerical conjunction and plurality 133 

131. Addition of terms generates classes primarily, not numbers. . . 135 

132. A term is indefinable, but not the number 1 135 


CHAPTER XVI. 

WHOLE AND PART. 


133. Single terms may be either simple or complex 13? 

134. Whole and part cannot be defined by logical priority .... 137 

135. Three kinds of relation of whole and part distinguished . . . 138 

136. Two kinds of wholes distinguished 140 

137. A whole is distinct from the numerical conjunction of its parts . . 141 

138. How far analysis is falsification 141 

139. A class as one is an aggregate 141 


CHAPTER XVII. 

INFINITE WHOLES. 


140. Infinite aggregates must be admitted 143 

141. Infinite unities, if there are any, are unknown to us . . . .144 

142. Are 'all infinite wholes aggregates of terms ? 146 

143. Grounds in favour of this view 146 


CHAPTER XVIII. 

RATIOS AND FRACTIONS. 

144. Definition of ratio 140 

145* Ratios are one-one relations 150 

146. Fractions are concerned with relations of whole and part . 150 

147* Fractions depend, not upon number, but upon magnitude of divisibility 151 

148. Summary of Part II .......... 152 



Table of Contents 


xxvii 


PART III. 

QUANTITY. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

THE MEANING OF MAGNITUDE. 

PAOK 


141). PreviouH views on the relation of number and quantity . . . U7 

1*50. Quantity not fundamental in mathematics 158 

151. Meaning of magnitude and quantity ....... 158 

152. Three possible theories of equality to be examined .... 158 

155. Equality is not identity of number of parts 180 

154. Equality is not an unanalyzable relation of quantities . . . 102 

155. Equality is sameness of magnitude ....... 104 

156. Every particular magnitude is simple 104 

157. The principle of abstraction 100 

158. Summary 107 

Note 108 


CHAPTER XX. 

THE RANGE OF QUANTITY. 

15.9. Divisibility does not belong to all quantities 170 

160. Distance 171 

161. Differential coefficients 178 

162. A magnitude is never divisible, but may be a magnitude of divisibility . 178 

108. Every magnitude is unanalysable 174 


, CHAPTER XXI. 

NUMBERS AS EXPRESSING MAGNITUDES : MEASUREMENT. 


164. Definition of measurement 176 

165. Possible grounds for holding all magnitudes to be measurable . . 176 

166. Intrinsic measurability 177 

167* Of divisibilities . . 178 

168. And of distances , 179 

168. Measure of distance and measure of stretch 181 

170. Distance-theories and stretch-theories of geometry .... 181 

171* Extensive and intensive magnitudes 182 

CHAPTER XXII. 

ZERO. 

172. Difficulties as to aero . 184 

178* Meinmig's theory 184 

174. Zero as minimum 185 

175. Zero distance as identity 186 

176. Zero as a null segment . 186 

177* Zero and negation 180 

178. Every kind of aero magnitude is in a sense indefinable .... 187 



Table of Contents 


xxvm 


CHAPTER XXIII. 

INFINITY, THE INFINITESIMAL, AND CONTINUITY. 


PAGE 

179. Problems of infinity not specially quantitative 188 

180. Statement of the problem in regarcTto quantity 188 

181. Three antinomies 189 

182. Of which the antitheses depend upon an axiom of finitude . . . 190 

188. And the use of mathematical induction ...... 192 

184. Which are both to be rejected 192 

188. Provisional sense of continuity 198 

186. Summary of Part HI 194 


PART IV. 

ORDER. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 


THE GENESIS OF SERIES. 

187. Importance of order 199 

188. Between and separation of couples 199 

189. Generation of order by one-one relations . . . . . 200 

190. By transitive asymmetrical relations 208 

191. By distances . . . 204 

192. By triangular relations . . . 204 

198. By relations between asymmetrical relations 205 

194. And by separation of couples 205 


CHAPTER XXV. 

THE MEANING OF ORDER. 


195. What is order ? 207 

196. Three theories of between 207 

197. First theory 208 

198. A relation is not between its terms 210 

199. Second theory of between 211 

200. There appear to be ultimate triangular relations 211 

201. Reasons for rejecting the second theory 218 

202. Third theory of between to be rejected 218 

208. Meaning of separation of couples . . . , . . . . 214 

204. Reduction to transitive asymmetrical relations 215 

205. This reduction is formal 216 

206. But is the reason why separation leads to order 216 

207. The second way of generating series is alone fundamental, and gives 

the meaning of order 216 



Table of Contents 


xxuc 


CHAPTER XXVI. 

ASYMMETRICAL RELATIONS. 

208. Classification of relations as regards symmetry and transitiveness . 218 

209. Symmetrical transitive relations . * . . . . . . , 219 

210. ReAexiveness and the principle of abstraction 219 

211. Kelative position 220 

212. Are relations reducible to predications ? 221 

{213. Monadistic theory of relations 222 

214. Reasons for rejecting this theory 222 

21*5. Monistic theory and the reasons for rejecting it 224 

210.) Order requires that relations should be ultimate 220 


CHAPTER XXVII. 

Difference of sense and difference of sign. 

217. Kant on difference of sense 227 

218. Meaning of difference of sense 228 

219. Difference of sign 228 

220. In the cases of finite numbers 229 

221. And of magnitudes 229 

222. Right and left 231 

223. Difference of sign arises from difference of sense among transitive 

asymmetrical relations 232 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 

ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN OPEN AND CLOSED SERIES. 

224. What is the difference between open and closed series ? 234 

225. Finite closed series 234 

220. Series generated by triangular relations 238 

227. Four-term relations 237 

228. Closed series are such as have an arbitrary first term .... 238 


CHAPTER XXIX. 

PROGRESSIONS AND ORDINAL NUMBERS. 

Definition of progressions 239 

290. All finite arithmetic applies to every progression .... 240 

231. Definition of ordinal numbers 242 

232. Definition of “nth” 248 

233. Positive and negative ordinals 244 



XXX 


Table of Content* 


CHAPTER XXX. 

DEDEKIND’S THEORY OF NUMBER. 


PAOK 

234. Dedekind’s principal ideas 245 

235. Representation of a system 245 

23(1. The notion of a chain 245 

237. The chain of an element 24(1 

238. Ueneralized form of mathematical induction 24(1 

231). Definition of a singly infinite system ' 247 

240. Definition of cardinals 247 

241. Dedekind’s proof of mathematical induction 248 

242. Objections to his definition of ordinals 248 

24*3. And of cardinals 249 


CHAPTER XXXI. 

DISTANCE. 


244. Distance not essential to order 252 

245. Definition of distance 253 

24(1. Measurement of distances 254 

247. In most series, the existence of distances is doubtful .... 254 

248. Summary of Part IV 255 


PART V. 

INFINITY AND CONTINUITY. 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

THE CORRELATION OK SERIES. 

249. The infinitesimal and space are no longer required in a statement of 


principles 259 

250. The supposed contradictions of infinity have been resolved . . 280 

251. Correlation of series 280 

252. Independent series and series by correlation 282 

253. Likeness of relations ' 282 

254. Functions 283 

255. Functions of a variable whose values form a series .... 284 

258. Functions which are defined by formulae 287 

257. Complete series 269 



Table of Contents 


won 


CHAPTER XXXin. 

REAL NUMBERS. 

PAOB 


258. Real numbers are not limits of series of rationale .... 270 

259. Segments of rationale 271 

290. Properties of segments 272 

261. Coherent classes in a series 274 

Note 274 


CHAPTER XXXIV. 

LIMITS AND IRRATIONAL NUMBERS. 


262. Definition of a limit 276 

263. Elementary properties of limits 277 

264. An arithmetical theory of irrationals is indispensable .... 277 

265. Dedekind’s theory of irrationals 278 

2 66. Defects in Dedekind’s axiom of continuity 279 

267. Objections to his theory of irrationals 280 

268. Weierstrass’s theory 282 

269. Cantor’s theory 283 

270. Real numbers are segments of rationals 285 


CHAPTER XXXV. 

CANTOR’S FIRST DEFINITION OF CONTINUITY. 


271. The arithmetical theory of continuity is due to Cantor . . . 287 

272. Cohesion 288 

273. Perfection 290 

274. Defect in Cantor’s definition of perfection 291 

275. The existence of limits must not be assumed without special grounds . 293 


CHAPTER XXXVI. 

ORDINAL CONTINUITY. 


276. Continuity is a purely ordinal notion 296 

277. Cantor’s ordinal definition of continuity ...... 290 

278. Only ordinal notions occur in this definition 298 

279. Infinite classes of integers can be arranged in a continuous series 298 

280. Segments of general compact series . . . . 299 

281. Segments defined by fundamental series 300 

282. Two compact series may be combined to form a series which is not 

compact 303 


i 



Table of Contents 


xxxii 


CHAPTER XXXVII. 

TRANSFINITE CARDINALS. 

PAGE 


283. Transfinite cardinals differ widely from transfinite ordinals . . . 304 

284. Definition of cardinals 304 

285. Properties of cardinals 306 

286. Addition, multiplication and exponentiation 307 

287. The smallest transfinite cardinal do 309 

288. Other transfinite cardinals 310 

289. Finite and transfinite cardinals form a single series by relation to 

greater and less , 311 


CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


TRANSFINITE ORDINALS. 

290. Ordinals are classes of serial relations 312 

291. Cantor’s definition of the second class of ordinals .... 312 

292. Definition of to 314 

293. An infinite class can be arranged in many types of series . . 315 

294. Addition and subtraction of ordinals 317 

295. Multiplication and division 318 

296. Well-ordered series 319 

297. Series which are not well-ordered 320 

298. Ordinal numbers are types of well-ordered series .... 321 

299. Relation-arithmetic 321 

300. Proofs of existence-theorems * 322 

301. There is no maximum ordinal number 323 

302. Successive derivative* of a series 323 


CHAPTER XXXIX. 

THE INFINITESIMAL CALCULUS. 

303. The infinitesimal has been usually supposed essential to the calculus . 325 

304. Definition of a continuous function 326 

305. Definition of the derivative of u function ...... 328 

306. The infinitesimal is not implied in this definition .... 329 

307. Definition of the definite integral 329 

308. Neither the infinite nor the infinitesimal is involved in this definition . 330 


CHAPTER XL. 

THE INFINITESIMAL AND THE IMPROPER INFINITE. 


309. A precise definition of the infinitesimal is seldom given . . . 331 

310. Definition of the infinitesimal and the improper infinite . . . 331 

311. Instances of the infinitesimal *132 

312. No infinitesimal segments in compact series 334 

313. Orders of infinity and infinitesimal ity 335 

314. Summary 337 



Table of Contents 


Ktsm 


CHAPTER XLI. 

PHILOSOPHICAL A ROOM KM'S CONCERNING THE INFINITESIMAL. 


I>A«K 

315* Current philosophical opinions illustrated by Cohen .... 338 

316. Who bases the calculus upon infinitesimals 338 

817. Space and motion are here irrelevant 380 

318. Cohen regards the doctrine of limits as insufficient for the calculus . 338 

318. And supposes limits to be essentially quantitative .... 3#0 

**120. To involve infinitesimal differences ....... 341 

321. And to introduce a new meaning of equality ..... *141 

322. He identifies the inextensive with the intensive 342 

323. Consecutive numbers are supposed to be required for continuous 

change #44 

324. Cohen’s views are to l>e rejected 344 


CHAPTER XLII. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE CONTINUUM. 


325. Philosophical sense of continuity not here in question . . . 346 

326. The continuum is composed of mutually external units . . . 346 

327. Zeno and Weierstrass 347 

328. The argument of dichotomy 348 

329. The objectionable and the innocent kind of endless regress . . . 348 

330. Extensional and intensioiml definition of a whole .... 349 

331. Achilles and the tortoise 

332. The arrow 

333. Change does not involve a state of change 351 

**134. ITie argument of the measure 352 

3**15. Summary of Cantor’s doctrine of continuity ... . . . 343 

330. 'Hie continuum consists of elements 353 


CHAPTER XUII. 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE INFINITE. 


8*17. Historical retrospect 355 

388. Positive doctrine of the infinite ........ 356 

339. Proof that there are infinite classes 357 

840. The paradox of Tristram Shandy . 353 

341. A whole and a part may be similar 350 

342. Whole and part and formal implication ...... 360 

343. No immediate predecessor of w or 30] 

344. Difficulty as regards the number of all terms, objects, or propositions . 862 

345* Cantor’s first proof that there is no greatest number . . . 363 

346. His second proof . 334 

347* Every class has more sub-classes than terms 333 

348. But this is impossible in certain cases 860 

349. Resulting contradictions , . . , . . . 9 . 337 

350. Nummary of Part V . . . , ... . . 000 



XXXIV 


Table of Content* 


PART VI. 

SPACE. 

CHAPTER XLIV. 

DIMENSIONS AND COMPLEX NUMBERS. 

Vaoe 

351. Retrospect 371 

352. Geometry is the science of series of two or more dimensions . . 372 

35*3. Non- Euclidean geometry 372 

354. Definition of dimensions 374 

355. Remarks on the definition 375 

356. The definition of dimensions is purely logical 376 

357. Complex numbers and universal algebra 376 

358. Algebraical generalization of number 377 

359. Definition of complex numbers 378 

360. Remarks on the definition 379 


CHAPTER XLV. 

PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. 

361. Recent threefold scrutiny of geometrical principles .... 381 

362. Projective, descriptive and metrical geometry 381 

363. Projective points and straight lines 382 

364. Definition of the plane 384 

365. Harmonic ranges 384 

366. Involutions 385 

367. Projective generation of order 386 

368. Mdbius nets 388 

369. Projective order presupposed in assigning irrational coordinates . 389 

370. Anharmonic ratio 390 

371. Assignment of coordinates to any point in space .... 390 

372. Comparison of projective and Euclidean geometry .... 391 

373. The principle of duality 392 


CHAPTER XLVL 

DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY. 

074. Distinction between projective and descriptive geometry . . . 393 

375. Method of Pasch and Peano 394 

376. Method employing serial relations 395 

077* Mutual independence of axioms 396 

378. Logical definition of the class of descriptive spaces 


. 897 



Table of Contents MEW 


Parts of straight lines . 

380. Definition of the plane ... 

381. Solid geometry 

382. Descriptive geometry applies to Euciidean and’ hyperbolic, but net 

elliptic space 

383. Ideal elements 

384. Ideal points . 

385. Ideal lines 

886 . Ideal planes 

387. The removal of a suitable selection of points renders a projective space 
descriptive 


PAOIS 

307 

388 

300 

300 

400 

400 

401 

402 

403 


CHAPTER XLVII. 


metrical geometry. 

Metrical geometry presupposes projective or descriptive geometry 
Errors in Euclid .... 


Superposition is not a valid method .... 

Errors in Euclid (continued) 

Axioms of distance 

Stretches 

Order as resulting from distance alone 
Geometries which derive the straight line from distance 
In most spaces, magnitude of divisibility can he used 
distance 

Meaning of magnitude of divisibility .... 
Difficulty of making distance independent of stretch . 
Theoretical meaning of measurement .... 

Definition of angle 

Axioms concerning angles 

An angle is a stretch of rays, not a class of points 

Areas and volumes 

Right and left 


instead 


CHAPTER XLVIII. 

RELATION OP METRICAL TO PROJECTIVE AND 
DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY. 


405. Non-quantitative geometry haB no metrical presuppositions . . 410 

400. Historical development of non-quantitative geometry .... 420 

407 • Non-quantitative theory of distance 421 

408. In descriptive geometry . 420 

409, And in projective geometry 425 

410, Geometrical theory of imaginary point-pairs ..... 428 

411. New projective theory of distance 427 



xxxri 


Table of Contents 


CHAPTER XLIX. 

DEFINITIONS OF VARIOUS SPACES. 


< PACK 

412. All kinds of spaces are definable in purely logical terms ... 420 

413. Definition of projective spaces of three dimensions 430 

414. Definition of Euclidean spaces of three dimensions .... 432 

415. Definition of Clifford’s spaces of two dimensions 434 


CHAPTER L. 

THE CONTINUITY OF SPACE. 


410. The continuity of a projective space 437 

417. The continuity of a metrical space 438 

418. An axiom of continuity enables us to dispense with the postulate of the 

circle 440 

410. Is space prior to points ? ........ 440 

420. Empirical premisses and induction 441 

421. There is no reason to desire our premisses to be self-evident . . 441 

422. Space is an aggregate of points, not a unity 442 


CHAPTER LI. 

LOGICAL ARGUMENTS AGAINST POINTS. 


423. Absolute aud relative position 445 

424. Lotze’s arguments against absolute position 446 

425. Lotze’s theory of relations 446 

426. The subject-predicate theory of propositions 448 

427. Lotze’s three kinds of Being 448 

428. Argumeut from the identity of indisceruibles 451 

429. Points are not active 452 

410. Argumeut from the necessary truths of geometry .... 454 

431. Points do not imply one another 454 


CHAPTER LII. 

KANTS THEORY OF SPACE, 


432. The preaeut work is diametrically opposed to Kant .... 456 

413. Summary of Kant's theory . • 456 

434. Mathematical reasoning requires no extra-logical element . » , 457 

435. Kant's mathematical antinomies ........ 458 

436. Summary of Part VI 461 



Table of Contents xxxm 


PART VII. 

MATTER AND MOTION. 

CHAPTER UII. 

MATTER. 

PAGE 

4(37* Dynamics is here considered as a branch of pure mathematics . . 466 

4*38. Matter is not implied by space 466 

4«39. Matter as substance ' 466 

440. Relations of matter to space and time 467 

441. Definition of matter in terms of logical constants .... 468 


CHAPTER LIV. 

MOTION. 

442. Definition of change 469 

443. There is no such thing as a state of change 471 

444. Change involves existence . 471 

445. Occupation of a place at a time 472 

446. Definition of motion 472 

447. There is no state of motion 473 


CHAPTER LV. 

CAUSALITY. 

448. The descriptive theory of dynamics 474 

449. Causation of particulars by particulars 476 

460. Cause and effect are not temporally contiguous 476 

451. Is there any causation of particulars by particulars ? .... 477 

452. Generalized form of causality 478 


CHAPTER LVI. 

DEFINITION OF A DYNAMICAL WORLD. 

463. Kinematics! motions 480 

464. Kinetic motions ........... 480 



Table of Contents 


CHAPTER LVII. 

NEWTON’S LAWS OF MOTION. 

PAUK 

45.5. Force and acceleration are fictions 482 

458. The law of inertia 482 

457. The second law of motion 488 

4*58. t The third law 4&1 

459. Summary of Newtonian principles 485 

480. Causality in dynamics ' : 480 

401. Accelerations as caused by particulars A 487 

402. No part of the laws of motion is an n priori truth . . . 488 


CHAPTER LVIII. 

ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE MOTION. 

488. Newton and his critics 489 

484. Grounds for absolute motion 490 

465. Neumann's theory 490 

488. Streintz's theory 491 

407. Mr Macaulay's theory 491 

488. Absolute rotation is still a change of relation 492 

489. „ Mach's reply to Newton 492 


CHAPTER LIX. 

HERTZ'S DYNAMICS. 

478. Summary of Hertz's system 494 

471. Hertz's innovations are not fundamental from the point of view of 

pure mathematics 495 

472. Principles common to Hertz and Newton 498 

478. Principle of the equality of cause and effect 498 

474, Summary of the work . . . 497 


APPENDIX A. 

THE LOGICAL AND ARITHMETICAL DOCTRINES OF FREGE. 

47& Principal points in Frege's doctrines 501 

478. Meaning and indication 502 

477. Truth-values and judgment 502 

478. Criticism . 503 

, 479. Are assumptions proper names for the true or the false? . . . 504 

480* Functions . 505 

481* Begriff and Gegenstand 507 



Table of Contents 


mix 


ttut „ ... MR* 

482. Recapitulation of theory of propositional functions * : . * 508 

483. Can concepts be made logical subjects? f ' , , * . ,510 

484. Kansas 510 

485. Definition of « and of wiatirn J 12 

483, Reasons for an extensional view of classes 513 

487. A class which has only one member is distinct from its only member * 513 

488. Possible theories to account for this fact 514 

48J). Recapitulation of theories already discussed 515 

400. The subject of a proposition may be plural .510 

401. Classes having only one member 517 

492. Theory of types .518 

493. Implication and symbolic logic 51 $ 

404. Definition of cardinal numbers , 51 g 

405, Frege's theory of series 520 

4J)ti. Kerry’s criticisms of Frege . * 520 


APPENDIX B. 

THE DOCTRINE OF TYPES. 

'V 

497. Statement of the doctrine 523 

498. Numbers and propositions as types , 534 

490. Are propositional concepts individuals ? 520 

500, Contradiction arising from the question whether there are more classes 

of propositions than propositions 527 


Index 




PART I. 


THE INDEFINABLE^ OF MATHEMATICS, 




CHAPTER I 


DEFINITION OF PURE MATHEMATICS. 

1. Pure Mathematics is the class of all propositions of the form 
“ p implies q? where p and q are propositions containing one or more 
variables, the same in the two propositions, and neither p nor q contains 
any constants except logical constants. And logical constants are all 
notions definable in terms of the following: Implication* the relation 
of a term to a class of which it is a member, the notion of such that , 
the notion of relation, and such further notions as may be involved 
in the general notion of propositions of the above form. In addition 
to these, mathematics uses a notion which is not a constituent of the 
propositions which it considers, namely the notion of truth. 

2. The above definition of pure mathematics is, no doubt, some* 
what unusual. Its various parts, nevertheless, appear to be capable of 
exact justification — a justification which it will be the object of the 
present work to provide. It will be shown that whatever has, in the 
past, been regarded as pure mathematics, is included in our definition, 
and that whatever else is included possesses those marks by which 
mathematics is commonly though vaguely distinguished from other 
studies. The definition professes to be, not an arbitrary decision to 
use a common word in an uncommon signification, but rather a precise 
analysis of the ideas which, more or less unconsciously, are implied in 
the ordinary employment of the term. Our method will therefore be 
one of analpis, and our problem may be called philosophical— in the 
sense, that is to say, that we seek to pass from the complex to the 
simple, from the demonstrable to its indemonstrable premisses. But 
in one respect not a few of our discussions will differ from those that 
are usually called philosophical. We shall be able, thanks to the labours 
of the mathematicians themselves, to arrive at certainty in regard to 
most of the questions with which we shall be concerned; and among 
those capable of an exact solution we shall find many of the problems 
which, in the past, have been involved in all the traditional uncertainty 
of philosophical strife. The nature of number, of infinity, of space, 
time and motion, and of mathematical inference itself are all questions 



4 The Indefinable of Mathematics [chap. I 

to which, in the present work, an answer professing itself demonstrable 
with mathematical certainty Mill be given — an answer which, however, 
consists in reducing the above problems to problems in pure logic, 
which last will not be found satisfactorily solved in what follows. 

3. The Philosophy of Mathematics has been hitherto as con- 
troversial, obscure and unprogressive as the other branches of philosophy. 
Although it was generally agreed that mathematics is in some sense 
true, philosophers disputed as to what mathematical propositions really 
meant : although something was true, no two people were agreed as to 
what it was that was true, and if something was known, no oriel knew 
what it was that was known. So long, however, as this was doubtful, 
it could hardly be said that any certain and exact knowledge was to be 
obtained in mathematics. We find, accordingly, that idealists have 
tended more and more to regard all mathematics as dealing with mere 
appearance, while empiricists have held everything mathematical to be 
approximation to some exact truth about which they had nothing to 
tell us. This state of things, it must be confessed, was thoroughly 
unsatisfactory. Philosophy asks of Mathematics : What does it mean ? 
Mathematics in the past was unable to answer, and Philosophy answered 
by introducing the totally irrelevant notion of mind. But now 
Mathematics is able to answer, so far at least as to reduce the whole 
of its propositions to certain fundamental notions of logic. At this 
point, the discussion must be resumed by Philosophy. I shall endeavour 
to indicate what are the fundamental notions involved, to prove at 
length that no others occur in mathematics, and to point out briefly 
the philosophical difficulties involved in the analysis of these notions. 
A complete treatment of these difficulties would involve a treatise on 
Logic, which will not be found in the following pages. 

4. There was, until very lately, a special difficulty in the principles 
of mathematics. It seemed plain that mathematics consists of deductions, 
and yet the orthodox accounts of deduction were largely or wholly 
inapplicable to existing mathematics. Not only the Aristotelian 
syllogistic theory, but also the modem doctrines of Symbolic Logic, 
were either theoretically inadequate to mathematical reasoning, or at 
any rate required such artificial forms of statement that they could not 
be practically applied. In this fact lay the strength of the Kantian 
view, which asserted that mathematical reasoning is not strictly formal, 
hut always uses intuitions, i.e. the a priori knowledge of space and 
time. Thanks to the progress of Symbolic Logic, especially as treated 
by Professor Peano, this part of the Kantian philosophy is now capable 
of a final and irrevocable refutation. By the help of ten principles 
of deduction and ten other premisses of a general logical nature 
(e*g. “ implication is a relation”), all mathematics can be strictly and 
formally deduced ; and all the entities that occur in mathematics can 
be defined in terms of those that occur in the above twenty premisses. 



2-6] Definition qf Pure Math#mrtk& $ 

In this statement, Mathematics includes not only Arithmetic and 
Analysis, but also Geometry, Euclidean and non-Euclidean, rational 
Dynamics, and an indefinite number of other studies still unborn or in 
their infancy. The fact tliat all Mathematics is Symbolic Logic is one 
of the greatest discoveries of our age; and when this fact has been 
established, the remainder of the principles of mathematics consists in 
the analysis of Symbolic Logic itself. 

6. The general doctrine that all mathematics is deduction by 
logical principles from logical principles was strongly advocated by 
Leibniz, who urged constantly that axioms ought to be proved and 
that all except a few fundamental notions ought to be defined. But 
owing partly to a faulty logic, partly to belief in the logical necessity 
of Euclidean Geometry, he was led into hopeless errors in the endeavour 
to carry out in detail a view which, in its general outline, is now known 
to be correct*. The actual propositions of Euclid, for example, do not 
follow from the principles of logic alone ; and the perception of this fact 
led Kant to his innovations in the theory of knowledge. But since 
the growth of non-Euclidean Geometry, it has appeared that pure 
mathematics has no concern with the question whether the axioms 
and propositions of Euclid hold of actual space or not: this is a question 
for applied mathematics, to be decided, so far as any decision is possible, 
by experiment and observation. What pure mathematics asserts is merely 
that the Euclidean propositions follow from the Euclidean axioms — Le . 
it asserts an implication: any space which has such and such properties 
has also such and such other properties. Thus, as dealt with in pure 
mathematics, the Euclidean and non-Euclidean Geometries are equally 
true: in each nothing is affirmed except implications. All propositions 
as to what actually exists, like the space we live in, belong to expert* 
mental or empirical science, not to mathematics ; when they belong to 
applied mathematics, they arise from giving to one or more of the 
variables in a proposition of pure mathematics some constant value 
satisfying the hypothesis, and thus enabling us, for that value of the 
variable, actually to assert both hypothesis and consequent instead of 
asserting merely the implication. We assert always in mathematics 
that if a certain assertion p is true of any entity x, or of any set of 
entities x> #, z , ... , then some other assertion q is true of those entities; 
but we do not assert either p or q separately of our entities. We assert 
a relation between the assertions p and y, which I shall call formal 
implication . 

6. Mathematical propositions are not only characterized by the 
feet that they assert implications, but also by the fact that they contain 
varhMes, The notion of the variable is one of the most difficult with 
which Logic has to deal, and in the present work a satisfactory theory 

7 * Gn this subject, c£ Coutarat, La Logiquede IVfo, UMHL 



6 


The Indefinable* of Mathematic* [CHAP, i 

as to its nature, in spite of much discussion, will hardly tie found. 
For the present, I only wish to make it plain that there are variables 
in all mathematical propositions, even where at first sight they might 
seem to be absent. Elementary Arithmetic might be thought to form 
an exception: 1 + 1 = 2 appears neither to contain variables nor to 
assert an implication. But as a matter of fact, as will be shown in 
Port II, the true meaning of this proposition is: “If x is one and 
y is one, and x differs from y, then x and y are two.” And this 
proposition both contains variables and asserts an implication. We 
shall find always, in all mathematical propositions, that the words any 
or some occur ; and these words are the marks of a variable and a formal 
implication. Thus the above proposition may be expressed in the form: 
“ Any unit and any other unit are two units.” The typical proposition 
of mathematics is of the form M <f> (x, y, £,...) implies yfr(x, y, z, ...), 
whatever values x, y, 2 ,... may have”; where <f>(x, y, and 

^(x> y, x,...), for every set of values of x, y, x, ..., are propositions. 
It is not asserted that <f> is always true, nor yet that yfr is always true, 
but merely that, in all cases, when <f> is false as much as when <f> is true, 
yfr follows from it. 

The distinction between a variable and a constant is somewhat 
obscured by mathematical usage. It is customary, for example, to speak 
of parameters as in some sense constants, but this is a usage which 
we shall have to reject. A constant is to be something absolutely 
definite, concerning which there is no ambiguity whatever. Thus 1, 2, 
8, t y 7r, Socrates, are constants ; and so are man, and the human race, 
past, present and future, considered collectively. Proposition, implica- 
tion, class, etc. are constants ; but a proposition, any proposition, some 
proposition, are not constants, for these phrases do not denote one 
definite object. And thus what are called parameters are simply 
variables. Take, for example, the equation ar + £y + c = 0, considered 
as the equation to a straight line in a plane. Here we say that x and y 
are variables, while a, ft , c are constants. But unless we are dealing 
with one absolutely particular line, say the line from a particular point 
in London to a particular point in Cambridge, our a, ft, c are not 
definite numbers, but stand for any numbers, and are thus also variables. 
And in Geometry nobody does deal with actual particular lines; we 
always discuss any line. The point is that we collect the various 
couples x y y into classes of classes, each class being defined as those 
couples that have a certain fixed relation to one triad (a, ft, c). But 
from class to class, a, ft, c also vary, and are therefore properly variables. 

7. It is customary in mathematics to regard our variables as 
restricted to certain classes: in Arithmetic, for instance, they are 
supposed to stand for numbers. But this only means that they 
stand for numbers, they satisfy some formula, is. the hypothecs that 
they ate numbers implies the formula. This, then, is what is really 



T 


6-8] Definition of Pure Mathematic* 

asserted, and in this proposition it is no longer necessary that our 
variables should be numbers; the implication holds equally when they 
are not so* Thus, for example, the proposition u x and y are numbers 
implies (x+yf**x? + 9xy +y*” holds equally if for x and y we subeti- 

S crates and Plato* : both hypothesis and consequent, in this case, 
false, but the implication will still be true. Thus in every 
tion of pure mathematics, when fully stated, the variables haute 
>lutely unrestricted field: any conceivable entity may be substi- 
or any one of our variables without impairing the truth of our 
tion. 

8. We can now understand why the constants in mathematics are 
to be restricted to logical constants in the sense defined above. The 
process of transforming constants in a proposition into variables leads 
to what is called generalization, and gives us, as it were, the formal 
essence of a proposition. Mathematics is interested exclusively in types 
of propositions ; if a proposition p containing only constants be proposed, 
and for a certain one of its terms we imagine others to be successively 
substituted, the result will in general be sometimes true and sometimes 
false. Thus, for example, we have “Socrates is a man”; here we turn 
Socrates into a variable, and consider “x is a man.” Some hypotheses 
as to x, for example, “ x is a Greek,” insure the truth of u x is a man”; 
thus u x is a Greek” implies “x is a man,” and this holds for all values of 
«r. But the statement is not one of pure mathematics, because it depends 
upon the particular nature of Greek and man. We may, however, vary 
these too, and obtain: If a and b are classes, and a is contained in b, 
then “r is an o” implies “x is a 6.” Here at last we have a proposition 
of pure mathematics, containing three variables and the constants class, 
contained in, and those involved in the notion of formal implications with 
variables. So long as any term in our proposition can be turned into 
a variable, our proposition can be generalized; and so long as this is 
possible, it is the business of mathematics to do it. If there are several 
chains of deduction which differ only as to the meaning of the symbols, 
so that propositions symbolically identical become capable of several 
interpretations, the proper course, mathematically, is to form the class of 
meanings which may attach to the symbols, and to assert that the 
formula in question follows from the hypothesis that the symbols belong 
to the class in question. In this way, symbols which stood for constants 
become transformed into variables, and new constants are substituted, 
consisting of classes to which the old constants belong. Cases of such 
generalization are so frequent that many will occur at once to every 
mathematician, and innumerable instances will be given in the present 
work. Whenever two sets of terms have mutual relations of the same 

* It is necessary to suppose arithmetical addition and multiplication defined (as 
may be eerily done) so that the above formula remains significant when jt and y arc 
aotnumbers. 



8 


The Indefinable* of Mathematics [CHAP, i 

type, the same form of deduction will apply to both. For example, the 
mutual relations of points in a Euclidean plane are of the same type as 
those of the complex numbers; hence plane geometry, considered as a 
branch of pure mathematics, ought not to decide whether its variables 
are points or complex numbers or some other set of entities having the 
same type of mutual relations. Speaking generally, we ought to deal, 
in every branch of mathematics, with any class of entities whose mutual 
relations are of a specified type; thus the class, as well as the particular 
term considered, becomes a variable, and the only true constants are the 
types of relations and what they involve. Now a type of relation is to 
mean, in this discussion, a class of relations characterized by th$ . above 
formal identity of the deductions possible in regard to the Various 
members of the class; and hence a type of relations, as will appear more 
fully hereafter, if not already evident, is always a class definable in 
terms of logical constants*. We may therefore define a type of relations 
as a class of relations defined by some property definable in terms of 
logical constants alone. 

9. Thus pure mathematics must contain no indefinables except 
logical constants, and consequently no premisses, or indemonstrable 
propositions, but such as are concerned exclusively with logical constants 
and with variables. It is precisely this that distinguishes pure from 
applied mathematics. In applied mathematics, results which have been 
shown by pure mathematics to follow from some hypothesis as to the 
variable are actually asserted of some constant satisfying the hypothesis 
in question. Thus terms which were variables become constant, and a 
new premiss is always required, namely: this particular entity satisfies 
the hypothesis in question. Thus for example Euclidean Geometry, as a 
branch of pure mathematics, consists wholly of propositions having the 
hypothesis “S is a Euclidean space.” If we go on to: “The space 
that exists is Euclidean,” this enables us to assert of the space that exists 
the consequents of all the hypothetical constituting Euclidean Geometry, 
where now the variable S is replaced by the constant actual space . But 
by this-step we pass from pure to applied mathematics. 

10. The connection of mathematics with logic, according to the 
above account, is exceedingly close. The fact that all mathematical 
constants are logical constants, and that all the premisses of mathematics 
are concerned with these, gives, I believe, the precise statement of what 
philosophers have meant in asserting that mathematics is & priori. The 
fact is that, when once the apparatus of logic has been accepted, all 
mathematics necessarily follows. The logical constants themselves are 
to be defined only by enumeration, for they are so fundamental that all 
the properties by which the class of them might be defined presuppose 

* One-one, many-one, transitive, symmetrical, are instances of types of relations 
with which we shall be often concerned. 



9 


8 - 10 ] Definition of Pure Mathematics 

some terms of the class. But practically, the method of discovering the 
logical constants is the analysis of symbolic logic, which will be the 
business of the following chapters. The distinction of mathematics from 
logic is very arbitrary, but if a distinction is desired, it may be made as 
follows. Logic consists of the premisses of mathematics, together with 
all other propositions which are concerned exclusively with logical 
constants and with variables but do not fulfil the above definition of 
mathematics (§ 1). Mathematics consists of all the consequences of the 
above premisses which assert formal implications containing variables, 
together with such of the premisses themselves as have these marks. 
Thus some of the premisses of mathematics, e.g. the principle of the 
syllogism, "if p implies q and q implies r, then p implies r,” will 
belong to mathematics, while others, such as “implication is a relation,’' 
will belong to logic but not to mathematics. But for the desire to 
adhere to usage, we might identify mathematics and logic, and define 
either as the class of propositions containing only variables and logical 
constants; but respect for tradition leads me rather to adhere to the 
above distinction, while recognizing that certain propositions belong to 
both sciences. 

From what has now been said, the reader will perceive that the 
present work has to fulfil two objects, first, to show that all mathematics 
follows from symbolic logic, and secondly to discover, as far as possible, 
what are the principles of symbolic logic itself. The first of these objects 
will be pursued in the following Parts, while the second belongs to 
Part I. And first of all, as a preliminary to a critical analysis, it will 
be necessary to give an outline of Symbolic Logic considered simply as a 
branch of mathematics. This will occupy the following chapter. 



CHAPTER II. 


SYMBOLIC LOGIC. 

11. Symbolic or Formal Logic— I shall use these terms as 
synonyms — is the study of the various general types of deduction. 
The word symbolic designates the subject by an accidental characteristic, 
for the employment of mathematical symbols, here as elsewhere, is merely 
a theoretically irrelevant convenience. The syllogism in all its figures 
belongs to Symbolic Logic, and would be the whole subject if all 
deduction were syllogistic, as the scholastic tradition supposed. It is 
from the recognition of asyllogistic inferences that modem Symbolic 
Logic, from Leibniz onward, has derived the motive to progress. Since 
the publication of Boole’s Laws of Thought (1854), the subject has 
been pursued with a certain vigour, and has attained to a very consider- 
able technical development*. Nevertheless, the subject achieved almost 
nothing of utility either to philosophy or to other branches of mathematics, 
until it was transformed by the new methods of Professor Peanof. 
Symbolic Logic has now become not only absolutely essential to every 
philosophical logician, but also necessary for the comprehension of 
mathematics generally, and even for the successful practice of certain 
branches of mathematics. How useful it is in practice can only be 
judged by those who have experienced the increase of power derived 
from acquiring it; its theoretical functions must be briefly set forth in 
the present chapter^. 


* By far the most complete account of the non-Peanesque methods will be found 
in the three volumes of Schroder, Vorletungen Ober die Algebra der Logik, Leipzig, 
1890, 1891, .1898. 

t See Formulain de MatMmatiqvet, Turin, 1898, with subsequent editions in 
later yean ; also Berne de Mathimatiquee, Vol. vu, No. 1 (1900). He editions of 
the F&mulaire will be quoted as F. 1898 and so on. The Bern de MathSnatiquei, 
which was originally the Bivieta di Matematka, will be referred to as B. d. M. 

$ In what fellows the main outlines are due to Professor Peano, except as 
regards relations; even in those cases where 1 depart Iran his views, the problems 
considered have been suggested to me by his works. 



11 


11-18] Symbolic Logic 

IS. Symbolic Logic is essentially concerned with inference in 
general*, and is distinguished from various special branches of mathe- 
matics mainly by its generality. Neither mathematics nor symbolic 
logic will study such special relations as (say) temporal priority, but 
mathematics will deal explicitly with the class of relations possessing 
the formal properties of temporal priority — properties which are 
summed up in the notion of continuity f- And the formal properties 
of a relation may be defined as those that can be expressed in terms 
of logical constants, or again as those which, while they are preserved, 
permit our relation to be varied without invalidating any inference in 
which the said relation is regarded in the light of a variable. But 
symbolic logic, in the narrower sense which is convenient, will not 
investigate what inferences are possible in respect of continuous relations 
(i.e. relations generating continuous series); this investigation belongs 
to mathematics, but is still too special for symbolic logic. What 
symbolic logic does investigate is the general rules by which inferences 
are made, and it requires a classification of relations or propositions 
only in so far as these general rules introduce particular notions. The 
particular notions which appear in the propositions of symbolic logic, 
and all others definable in terms of these notions, are the logical 
constants. The number of indefinable logical constants is not great: 
it appears, in fact, to be eight or nine. These notions alone form the 
subject-matter of the whole of mathematics: no others, except such 
as are definable in terms of the original eight or nine, occur anywhere 
in Arithmetic, Geometry, or rational Dynamics. For the technical 
study of Symbolic Logic, it is convenient to take as a single indefinable 
the notion of a formal implication, i.e. of such propositions as “x is 
a man implies x is a mortal, for all values of x " — propositions whose 
general type is: “ <f> (x) implies >jr(x) for all values of x? where £(#), 
y/r ( x ), for all values of x, are propositions. The analysis of this notion 
of formal implication belongs to the principles of the subject, but is not 
required for its formal development. In addition to this notion, we 
require as indefinables the following : Implication between propositions 
not containing variables, the relation of a term to a class of which it 
is a member, the notion of such that, the notion of relation, and truth. 
By means of these notions, all the propositions of symbolic logic can be 
stated. 

13. The subject of Symbolic Logic consists of three parts, the 
calculus of propositions, the calculus of classes, and the calculus of 
relations. Between the first two, there is, within limits, a certain 
parallelism, which arises as follows: In any symbolic expression, the 

* I may as well say at once that I do not distinguish between inference and 
deduction. What is called induction appears to me to be either disguised deduction 
or a mere method of making plausible guesses 

t See below, Fart V, Chap, xxxvi. 



12 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, n 

letters may be interpreted as classes or as propositions, and the relation 
of inclusion in the one case may be replaced by that of formal implication 
in the other. Thus, for example, in the principle of the syllogism, if 
a, 6, c be classes, and a is contained in 6, b in c, then a is contained in c; 
but if a y b 9 c be propositions, and a implies b, b implies c, then a implies c. 
A great deal has been made of this duality, and in the later editions of 
the Formulaire , Peano appears to have sacrificed logical precision to its 
preservation *. But, as a matter of fact, there are many ways in which 
the calculus of propositions differs from that of classes. Consider, 
for example, the following: “If p, q, r are propositions, and ^implies 
q or r, then p implies q or p implies r.” This proposition is true ; but 
its correlative is false, namely : w If a, 6, c are classes, and a is contained 
in b or c, then a is contained in b or a is contained in c.” For example, 
English people are all either men or women, but are not all men nor yet 
all women. The fact is that the duality holds for propositions asserting 
of a variable term that it belongs to a class, i.e. such propositions as 
u x is a man,* provided that the implication involved be formal, i.e. one 
which holds for all values of x. But “ x is a man” is itself not a 
proposition at all, being neither true nor false ; and it is not with such 
entities that we are concerned in the propositional calculus, but with 
genuine propositions. To continue the above illustration : It is true 
that, for all values of x, “ x is a man or a woman * either implies “ x is a 
man” or implies “ x is a woman.” But it is false that “x is a man or 
woman” either implies “ x is a man” for all values of x 9 or implies 
u x is a woman ” for all values of x. Thus the implication involved, which 
is always one of the two, is not formal, since it does not hold for all values 
of x y being not always the same one of the two. The symbolic affinity 
of the propositional and the class logic is, in fact, something of a snare, 
and we have to decide which of the two we are to make fundamental. 
Mr MeColl, in an important series of papers f, has contended for the 
view that implication and propositions are more fundamental than 
inclusion and classes; and in this opinion I agree with him. But he 
does not appear to me to realize adequately the distinction between 
genuine propositions and such as contain a real variable : thus he is led 
to spneak of propositions as sometimes true and sometimes false, which 
of course is impossible with a genuine proposition. As the distinction 
involved is of very great importance, I shall dwell on it before proceeding 
further. A proposition, we may say, is anything that is true or that is 

* On the points where the duality breaks down, cf. Schroder, op. cit., Vol. ii. 
Lecture 21. 

' t Cf. “The Calculus of Equivalent, Statements,” Proceedings of the London 
Mathematical Society, Vol. ix and subsequent volumes ; “Symbolic Reasoning,” Mind, 
Jan. 1880, Oct. 1897, and Jan. 1900 ; “La Logique Symbolique et ses Applications,” 
BtbUothcque du Congres International de Philosophic, Vol. vn (Paris, 1901). 1 shall in 

future quote the proceedings of the above Congress by the title Congrts. 



18 


13 , 14 ] Symbolic Logic 

false. An expression such as M x is a man ” is therefore not a proposi- 
tion, for it is neither true nor false. If we give to x any constant value 
whatever, the expression becomes a proposition : it is thus as it were a 
schematic form standing for any one of & whole class of propositions. 
And when we say x is a man implies x is a mortal for all values of a?," 
we are not asserting a single implication, but a class of implications ; 
we have now a genuine proposition, in which, though the letter x appears, 
there is no real variable : the variable is absorbed in the same kind of 
way as the x under the integral sign in a definite integral, so that the 
result is no longer a function of x. Peano distinguishes a variable which 
appears in this way as apparent , since the proposition does not depend 
upon the variable ; whereas in “ x is a man ” there are different proposi- 
tions for different values of the variable, and the variable is what Peano 
calls real*. I shall speak of propositions exclusively where there is no 
real variable: where there are one or more real variables, and for all 
values of the variables the expression involved is a proposition, I shall 
call the expression a propositional function . The study of genuine 
propositions is, in my opinion, more fundamental than that of classes ; 
but the study of propositional functions appears to be strictly on a 
par with that of classes, and indeed scarcely distinguishable therefrom. 
Peano, like McColl, at first regarded propositions as more fundamental 
than classes, but he, even more definitely, considered propositional func- 
tions rather than propositions. From this criticism, Schroder is exempt: 
his second volume deals with genuine propositions, and points out their 
formal differences from classes. 

A. The Propositional Calculus . 

14 . The propositional calculus is characterized by the fact that 
all its propositions have as hypothesis and as consequent the assertion of 
a material implication. Usually, the hypothesis is of the form “p im- 
plies pf etc., which (§ 16) is equivalent to the assertion that the letters 
which occur in the consequent are propositions. Thus the consequents 
consist of propositional functions which are true of all propositions. 
It is important to observe that, though the letters employed are symbols 
for variables, and the consequents are true when the variables are given 
values which are propositions, these values must be genuine propositions, 
not propositional functions. The hypothesis “p is a proposition ” is 
not satisfied if for p we put u x is a man,” but it is satisfied if we put 
« Socrates is a man ” or if we put “ x is a man implies x is a mortal for 
all values of x” Shortly, we may say that the propositions represented 
by single letters in this calculus are variables, but do not contain 
variables — in the case, that is to say, where the hypotheses of the 
propositions which the calculus asserts are satisfied. 

* F. 1901, p. 2. 



14 


The Indefinable* qf Mathematic* [chap, n 

10* Our calculus studies the relation of implication between 
propositions. This relation must be distinguished from the relation 
of formal implication, which holds between propositional functions 
when the one implies the other for all values of the variable Formal 
implication is also involved in this calculus, but is not explicitly 
studied: we do not consider propositional functions in general, but 
only certain definite propositional functions which occur in the propo- 
sitions of our calculus. How far formal implication is definable in 
terms of implication simply, or material implication as it may be 
called, is a difficult question, which will be discussed in Chapter m. 
What the difference is between the two, an illustration will explain. 
The fifth proposition of Euclid follows from the fourth : if the fourth 
is true, so is the fifth, while if the fifth is false, so is the fourth. 
This is a case of material implication, for both propositions are absolute 
constants, not dependent for their meaning upon the assigning of a 
value to a variable. But each of them states a formal implication. The 
fourth states that if x and y be triangles fulfilling certain conditions, 
then x and y are triangles fulfilling certain other conditions, and that 
this implication holds for all values of x and y ; and the fifth states that 
if x is an isosceles triangle, x has the angles at the base equal. The 
formal implication involved in each of these two propositions is quite 
a different thing from the material implication holding between the 
propositions as wholes; both notions are required in the propositional 
calculus, but it is the study of material implication which specially 
distinguishes this subject, for formal implication occurs throughout the 
whole of mathematics. 

It has been customaxy, in treatises on logic, to confound the two 
kinds of implication, and often to be really considering the formal kind 
where the material kind only was apparently involved. For example, 
when it is said that “Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates is a mortal,” 
Socrates is felt as a variable: he is a type of humanity, and one feels that 
any other man would have done as well. If, instead of therefore^ which 
implies the truth of hypothesis and consequent, we put “Socrates is a 
man implies Socrates is a mortal,” it appears at once that we may 
substitute not only another man, but any other entity whatever, in the 
place of Socrates. Thus although what is explicitly stated, in such a 
case, is a material implication, what is meant is a formal implication ; and 
some effort is needed to confine our imagination to material implication. 

16. A definition of implication is quite impossible. If p implies 
j, then if p is true q is true, i,e. p * s truth implies q ' s truth ; also if q is 
false p is false, i.e. qn falsehood implies p's falsehood*. Thus truth and 
falsehood give us merely new implications, not a definition of implication. 

* The reader is recommended to observe that the main implications in these 
statements are formal, #\e. “p implies q” formally implies (i p * s truth implies f’s 
truth/* while the subordinate implications are material. 



16 


16 - 17 ] Symbolic Logic 

If p implies q, then both are false or both true, or p is false and q true ; 
it is impossible to have q false and p true, and it is necessary to have 
q true or p false*. In fact, the assertion that q is true or p false turns 
out to be strictly equivalent to “p implies < 7 ”; but as equivalence means 
mutual implication, this still leaves implication fundamental, and not 
definable in terms of disjunction. Disjunction, on the other hand, is 
definable in terms of implication, as we shall shortly see. It follows 
from the above equivalence that of any two propositions there must be 
one which implies the other, that false propositions imply all propositions, 
and true propositions are implied by all propositions. But these are 
results to be demonstrated; the premisses of our subject deal exclusively 
with rules of inference. 

It may be observed that, although implication is indefinable, 
proposition can be defined. Every proposition implies itself, and 
whatever is not a proposition implies nothing. Hence to say u p is a 
proposition” is equivalent to saying M p implies/)”; and this equivalence 
may be used to define propositions. As the mathematical sense of 
dejinition is widely different from that current among philosophers, 
it may be well to observe that, in the mathematical sense, a new 
propositional function is said to be defined when it is stated to be 
equivalent to (Le. to imply and be implied by) a propositional function 
which has either been accepted as indefinable or has been defined in 
terms of indefinables. The definition of entities which are not 
propositional functions is derived from such as are in ways which will 
be explained in connection with classes find relations. 

17. We require, then, in the propositional calculus, no indefinables 
except the two kinds of implication — remembering, however, that formal 
implication is a complex notion, whose analysis remains to be undertaken. 
As regards our two indefinables, we require certain indemonstrable 
propositions, which hitherto I have not succeeded in reducing to less 
than ten. Some indemonstrables there must be; and some propositions, 
such as the syllogism, must be of the number, since no demonstration 
is possible without them. But concerning others, it may be doubted 
whether they are indemonstrable or merely undemonstrated; and it 
should be observed that the method of supposing an axiom false, and 
deducing the consequences of this assumption, which has been found 
admirable in such cases as the axiom of parallels, is here not universally 
available. For all our axioms are principles of deduction; and if they 
are true, the consequences which appear to follow from the employment 
of an opposite principle will not really follow, so that arguments from 
the supposition of the falsity of an axiom are here subject to special 
fallaci es. Thus the number of indemonstrable propositions may be 
capable of further reduction, and in regard to some pf them I know of 

* I may as well state once for all that the alternatives of a disjunction will never 
be considered » mutually exclusive unless expressly said to he so. 



16 


The Indefinable# of Mathematics [chap, n 

no grounds for regarding them as indemonstrable except that they have 
hitherto remained undemonstrated. 

18. The ten axioms are the following. (1) If p implies q , then 
p implies q*; in other words, whatever p and q may be, “p implies 9 ” 
is a proposition. (2) If p implies 9 , then p implies p; in other words, 
whatever implies anything is a proposition. (3) If p implies q 9 then q 
implies 9 ; in other words, whatever is implied by anything is a proposition. 
(4) A true hypothesis in an implication may be dropped, and the 
consequent asserted. This is a principle incapable of formal symbolic 
statement, and illustrating the essential limitations of formalism — a 
point to which I shall return at a later stage. Before proceeding 
further, it is desirable to define the joint assertion of two propositions, 
or what is called their logical product. This definition is highly artificial, 
and illustrates the great distinction between mathematical and philo- 
sophical definitions. It is as follows: If p implies p, then, if q implies 9 , 
pq (the logical product of p and q) means that if p implies that q implies 
r, then r is true. In other words, if p and q are propositions, their joint 
assertion is equivalent to saying that every proposition is true which is 
such that the first implies that the second implies it. We cannot, with 
formal correctness, state our definition in this shorter form, for the 
hypothesis “p and q are propositions” is already the logical product of 
“ p is a proposition” and “ q is a proposition.” We can now state the 
six main principles of inference, to each of which, owing to its importance, 
a name is to be given; of these all except the last will be found in 
Peano’s accounts of the subject. (5) If p implies p and q implies 9 , 
then pq implies p. This is called simplification, and asserts merely that 
the joint assertion of two propositions implies the assertion of the first 
of the two. ( 6 ) If p implies q and q implies r, then p implies r. This 
will be called the syllogism . (7) If q implies q and r implies r, and 

if p implies that q implies r, then pq implies r. This is the principle of 
importation. In the hypothesis, we have a product of three propositions; 
but this can of course be defined by means of the product of two. 
The principle states that if p implies that q implies r, then r follows 
from the joint assertion of p and q. For example: “If I call on so-and- 
so, then if she is at home I shall be admitted” implies “If I call on 
so-and-so and she is at home, I shall be admitted.” ( 8 ) If p implies 
p and q implies 9 , then, if pq implies r, then p implies that q implies r. 
This is the converse of the preceding principle, and is called exportation *f\ 
The previous illustration reversed will illustrate this principle: (9) If 
p implies q and p implies r, then p implies qr: in other words, a 

* Note that the implications denoted by if and then, in these axioms, are formal, 
while those denoted by implies are material. 

t (7) and (8) cannot (I think) be deduced from the definition of the logical 
product, because they are required for passing from “If p is a proposition, then ‘q is 
a proposition* implies etc.** to “If p and q are propositions, then etc.** 



17 


17 - 19 ] Symbolic Logic 

proposition which implies each of two propositions implies them both. 
This is called the principle of composition . (10) If p implies p and 

g implies g, then ut p implies g’ implies p ” implies p . This is called 
the principle of reduction ; it has less self-evidence than the previous 
principles, but is equivalent to many propositions that are self-evident. 
I prefer it to these, because it is explicitly concerned, like its predecessors, 
with implication, and has the same kind of logical character as they 
have. If we remember that “ p implies g” is equivalent to “g or not-/?,” 
we can easily convince ourselves that the above principle is true; for 
p implies g’ implies p ” is equivalent to “/? or the denial of *g or not- 
p ,’” Le. to “j p or ‘/? and not g,’” i.e. to p . But this way of persuading 
ourselves that the principle of reduction is true involves many logical 
principles which have not yet been demonstrated, and cannot be 
demonstrated except by reduction or some equivalent. The principle is 
especially useful in connection with negation. Without its help, by 
means of the first nine principles, we can prove the law of contradiction; 
we can prove, if p and q be propositions, that p implies not-not-/?; that 
“jp implies not-g” is equivalent to “ g implies not-/?” and to not-/?g; 
that “/? implies g” implies “not-g implies not-/?”; that p implies that 
not-/? implies /?; that not-/? is equivalent to “/? implies not-/?”; and that 
“p implies not-g” is equivalent to “not-not-/? implies not-g.” But we 
cannot prove without reduction or some equivalent (so far at least as 
I have been able to discover) that p or not-/? must be true (the law of 
excluded middle); that every proposition is equivalent to the negation 
of some other proposition; that not-not-/? implies/?; that “not-g implies 
not-/?” implies “/? implies g”; that “not-/? implies /?” implies /?, or that 
“/? implies g” implies “g or not-/?.” Each of these assumptions is 
equivalent to the principle of reduction, and may, if we choose, be sub- 
stituted for it. Some of them — especially excluded middle and double 
negation — appear to have far more self-evidence. But when we have 
seen how to define disjunction and negation in terms of implication, we 
shall see that the supposed simplicity vanishes, and that, for formal 
purposes at any rate, reduction is simpler than any of the possible 
alternatives. For this reason I retain it among my premisses, in 
preference to more usual and more superficially obvious propositions. 

19. Disjunction or logical addition is defined as follows: “/? or g” 
is equivalent to “*/? implies g’ implies g.” It is easy to persuade 
ourselves of this equivalence, by remembering that a false proposition 
implies every other; for if p is false, p does imply g, and therefore, 
if “ p implies g” implies g, it follows that g is true. But this argument 
again uses principles which have not yet been demonstrated, and is 
merely designed to elucidate the definition by anticipation. From this 
definition, by the help of reduction, we can prove that 44 p or g” is 
equivalent to “g or /?.” An alternative definition, deductible from the 
above, is : 44 Any proposition implied by p and implied by g is true,” or. 



18 The Indefinable* of Mathematic* [chap, n 

in other words, “ *p implies s'" and *q implies s' together imply s 9 whatever 
s may be J* Hence we proceed to the definition of negation: not-^p is 
equivalent to the assertion that p implies all propositions, i.e. that 
tt r implies r" implies u p implies r m whatever r may be*. From this 
point we can prove the laws of contradiction and excluded middle and 
double negation, and establish all the formal properties of logical 
multiplication and addition — the associative, commutative and distributive 
laws. Thus the logic of propositions is now complete. 

Philosophers will object to the above definitions of disjunction and 
negation on the ground that what we mean by these notions is some- 
thing quite distinct from what the definitions assign as their meanings, 
and that the equivalences stated in the definitions are, as a matter of 
fact, significant propositions, not mere indications as to the Way in 
which symbols are going to be used. Such an objection is, I think, well- 
founded, if the above account is advocated as giving the true philosophic 
analysis of the matter. But where a purely formed purpose is to be 
served, any equivalence in which a certain notion appears on one side 
but not on the other will do for a definition. And the advantage of 
having before our minds a strictly formal development is that it pro- 
vides the data for philosophical analysis in a more definite shape than 
would be otherwise possible. Criticism of the procedure of formal logic, 
therefore, will be best postponed until the present brief account has been 
brought to an end. 


B. The Calculus of Classes . 

20. In this calculus there are very much fewer new primitive pro- 
positions — in fact, two seem sufficient — but there are much greater 
difficulties in the way of non-symbolic exposition of the ideas embedded 
in our symbolism. These difficulties, as far as possible, will be postponed 
to later chapters. For the present, I shall tiy to make an exposition 
which is to be as straightforward and simple as possible. 

The calculus of classes may be developed by regarding as fundamental 
the notion of doss, and also the relation of a member of a class to its 
class. This method is adopted by Professor Peano, and is perhaps more 
philosophically correct than a different method which, for formal pur- 
poses, I have found more convenient. In this method we still take as 

* The principle that false propositions imply all propositions solves Lewis 
Carroll's logical paradox in Mind , N. S. No. 11 (1894). The assertion made in that 
paradox is that, if p, q 9 r be propositions, and q implies r, while p implies that 
q implies not-r, then p must be false, on the supposed ground that “q implies r” and 
“q implies not-r" are incompatible. But in virtue of our definition of negation, if 
q be false both these implications will hold: the two together, in fact, what- 
ever proposition r may be, are equivalent to not-g. Thus the only inference 
warranted by Lewis Carroll’s premisses is that if p be true, q must be false, i.e. that 
p implies not-g; and this is the conclusion, oddly enough, which common sense would 
have drawn in the particular case which he discusses. 



19 


19 - 22 ] Symbolic Logic 

fundamental the relation (which, following Peano, I shall denote by e) 
of an individual to a class to which it belongs, i.e. the relation of Socrates 
to the human race which is expressed by saying that Socrates is a man. 
In addition to this, we take as indefinables the notion of a propositional 
function and the notion of such that . It is these three notions that 
characterize the class-calculus. Something must be said in explanation 
of each of them. 

21 . The insistence on the distinction between e and the relation of 
whole and part between classes is due to Peano, and is of very great 
importance to the whole technical development and the whole of the 
applications to mathematics. In the scholastic doctrine of the syllogism, 
and in all previous symbolic logic, the two relations are confounded, 
except in the work of Frege*. * The distinction is the same as that 
between the relation of individual to species and that of species to 
genus, between the relation of Socrates to the class of Greeks and the 
relation of Greeks to men. On the philosophical nature of this distinc- 
tion I shall enlarge when I come to deal critically with the nature of 
classes; for the present it is enough to observe that the relation of 
whole and part is transitive, while e is not so: we have Socrates is a 
a man, and men are a class, but not Socrates is a class. It is to be 
observed that the class must be distinguished from the class-concept 
or predicate by which it is to be defined : thus men are a class, while 
man is a class-concept. The relation e must be regarded as holding 
between Socrates and men considered collectively, not between Socrates 
and man . I shall return to this point in Chapter vi. Peano holds 
that all propositional functions containing only a single variable are 
capable of expression in the form “x is an a," where a is a constant 
class; but this view we shall find reason to doubt. 

22. The next fundamental notion is that of a propositional func- 

tion. Although propositional functions occur in the calculus of pro- 
positions, they are there each defined as it occurs, so that the general 
notion is not required. But in the class-calculus it is necessary to intro- 
duce the general notion explicitly. Peano, does not require it, owing to 
his assumption that the form is an a* is general for one variable, and 
that extensions of the same form are available for any number of 
variables. But we must avoid this assumption, and must therefore 
introduce the notion of a propositional function. We may explain (but 
not define) this notion as follows : is a propositional function if, for 

every value of x, $x is a proposition, determinate when x is given. 
Thus u x is a man * is a propositional function. In any proposition, how- 
ever complicated, which contains no real variables, we may imagine one 
of the terms, not a verb or adjective, to be replaced by other terms: instead 
of “ Socrates is a man * we may put V Plato is a man,” w the number 2 

* See Yti&Begrijjfockiift, Halle, 1870, and Grundgetetze der Arithmetic, Jena, 1883, 

p. 2, 



20 


The Indefinahles of Mathematics [ chap , ii 

is a man,” and so on*. Thus we get successive propositions all agreeing 
except as to the one variable term. Putting x for the variable term, 
44 x is a man ” expresses the type of all such propositions. A pro- 
positional function in general will be true for some values of the variable 
and false for others. The instances where it is true for all values of the 
variable, so far as they are known to me, all express implications, such as 
44 x is a man implies x is a mortal” ; but I know of no d priori reason for 
asserting that no other propositional functions are true for all values of 
the variable. 

28. This brings me to the notion of such that. The values of x 
which render a propositional function <f>x true are like the roots of an 
equation — indeed the latter are a particular case of the former — and we 
may consider all the values of x which are such that <f>x is true. In general, 
these values form a class, and in fact a class may be defined as all 
the terms satisfying some propositional function. There is, however, 
some limitation required in this statement, though I have not been able to 
discover precisely what the limitation is. This results from a certain 
contradiction which I shall discuss at length at a later stage (Chap. x). 
The reasons for defining clccss in this way are, that we require to provide 
for the null-class, which prevents our defining a class as a term to 
which some other has the relation e, and that we wish to be able 
to define classes by relations, i.e . all the terms which have to other 
terms the relation R are to form a class, and such cases require somewhat 
complicated propositional functions. 

24. With regard to these three fundamental notions, we require 
tw r o primitive propositions. The first asserts that if x belongs to the 
class of terms satisfying a propositional function <f>x , then <f>x is true. 
The second asserts that if tf>x and ipx are equivalent propositions for all 
values of x % then the class of x's such that <f>x is true is identical with 
the class of x's such that iftx is true. Identity, which occurs here, is 
defined as follows: x is identical with // if y belongs to every class to 
which x belongs, on other words, if 44 x is a u ” implies 44 y is a u ” for 
all values of u. With regard to the primitive proposition itself, it is to 
be observ ed that it decides in favour of an extensional view of classes. 
Two class concepts need not be identical when their extensions are so: 
man and featherless biped are by no means identical, and no more are even 
prime and integer betxveen 1 and 8. These are class -concepts, and if our 
axiom is to hold, it must not be of these that we are to speak in dealing 
with classes. We must be concerned with the actual assemblage of 
terms, not with any concept denoting that assemblage. For mathe- 
matical purposes, this is quite essential Consider, for example, the 
problem as to how many combinations can be formed of a given set 

* Verbs and adjectives occurring as such are distinguished by the fact that, if 
they be taken as variable, the resulting function is only a proposition for name values 
of the variable, i.e. for such as are verbs or adjectives respectively. See Chap. zv. 



SI 


22 - 25 ] Symbolic Logic 

of terms taken any number at a time, i.e. as to how many classes are 
contained in a given class. If distinct classes may have the same ex- 
tension, this problem becomes utterly indeterminate. And certainly 
common usage would regard a class as determined when all its terms are 
given. The extensions! view of classes, in some form, is thus essential to 
Symbolic Logic and to mathematics, and its necessity is expressed in the 
above axiom. But the axiom itself is not employed until we come to 
Arithmetic ; at least it need not be employed, if we choose to distinguish 
the equality of classes, which is defined as mutual inclusion, from the 
identity of individuals. Formally, the two are totally distinct : identity 
is defined as above, equality of a and b is defined by the equivalence of 
u x is an a * and “ x is a b " for all values of x. 

25. Most of the propositions of the class-calculus are easily 
deduced from those of the propositional calculus. The logical product 
or common part of two classes a and b is the class of x\ such that the 
logical product of “ x is an a " and “ x is a b " is true. Similarly we define 
the logical sum of two classes (a or 6), and the negation of a class (not-a). 
A new idea is introduced by the logical product and sum of a class of 
classes. If k is a class of classes, its logical product is the class of terms be- 
longing to each of the classes of k, i.e. the class of terms x such that w u 
is a k ” implies “ x is a u ” for all values of u . The logical sum is the class 
which is contained in every class in which every class of the class k is 
contained, i.e. the class of terms x such that, if “ w is a k" implies i6 u is 
contained in c" for all values of m, then, for all values of c, x is a c. 
And we say that a class a is contained in a class b when “ x is an a ** 
implies M x is a b " for all values of x. In like manner with the above 
we may define the product and sum of a class of propositions. Another 
very important notion is what is called the existence of a class — a word 
which must not be supposed to mean what existence means in philosophy. 
A class is said to exist when it has at least one term. A formal defini- 
tion is as follows: a is an existent class when and only when any 
proposition is true provided “x is an a” always implies it whatever value 
we may give to x. It must be understood that the proposition implied 
must be a genuine proposition, not a propositional function of x. A 
class a exists when the logical sura of all propositions of the form “a? is 
an a * is true, i.e. when not all such propositions are false. 

It is important to understand clearly the manner in which pro- 
positions in the class-calculus are obtained from those in the pro- 
positional calculus. Consider, for example, the syllogism. We have 
*p implies q* and “q implies r" imply “p implies r." Now put “x is 
an a," “x is a 6, ” “x is a c* for p, j, r, where x must have some definite 
value, but it is not necessary to decide what value. We then find that 
if, for the value of x in question, x is an a implies x is a 6, and x is a 5 
implies x is a c, then x is an a implies x is a c. Since the value of a? is 
irrelevant, we may vary x, and thus we find that if a is contained in 5, 



22 


The Indefinable* of Mathematics [chap, n 

and b in c 9 then a is contained in c. This is the dass-syllqgism, But in 
applying this process it is necessary to employ the utmost caution, 
if fallacies are to be successfully avoided. In this connection it will 
be instructive to examine a point upon which a dispute has arisen 
between Schroder and Mr McColl*. Schroder asserts that if p 9 q , r are 
propositions, “pq implies r” is equivalent to the disjunction “p implies r 
or q implies r” Mr McColl admits that the disjunction implies the 
other, but denies the converse implication. The reason for the diver- 
gence is, that Schroder is thinking of propositions and material im- 
plication, while Mr McColl is thinking of propositional functions and 
formal implication. As regards propositions, the truth of the principle 
may be easily made plain by the following considerations. If pq implies 
r, then, if either p or q be false, the one of them which is false implies r, 
because false propositions imply all propositions. But if both be true, 
n is true, and therefore r is true, and therefore p implies r and ^ im- 
plies r, because true propositions are implied by eveiy proposition. 
Thus in any case, one at least of the propositions p and q must 
imply r. (This is not a proof, but an elucidation.) But Mr McColl 
objects: Suppose p and q to be mutually contradictory, and r to be the 
null proposition, then pq implies r but neither p nor q implies r. Here 
we are dealing with propositional functions and formal implication. A 
propositional function is said to be null when it is false for all values of 
x ; and the class of x\ satisfying the function is called the null-class, 
being in fact a class of no terms. Either the function or the class, 
following Peano, I shall denote by A. Now let our r be replaced by A, 
our p by <^r, and our q by not-^r, where <f>x is any propositional function. 
Then pq is false for all values of x 9 and therefore implies A. But it is 
not in general the case that <f>x is always false, nor yet that not-<^r is always 
false; hence neither always implies A. Thus the above formula can only 
be truly interpreted in the propositional calculus : in the class-calculus 
it is false. This may be easily rendered obvious by the following 
considerations: Let <f>x 9 \/rx 9 yx be three propositional functions. Then 
“ <f>x . yfrx implies yx” implies, for all values of x 9 that either <f>x implies 
yx or ifrx implies yx. But it does not imply that either $x implies yx 
for all values of x 9 or yfrx implies yx for all values of x. The disjunction 
is what I shall call a variable disjunction, as opposed to a constant one: 
that is, in some cases one alternative is true, in others the other, whereas 
in a constant disjunction there is one of the alternatives (though it is not 
stated which) that is always true. Wherever disjunctions occur in regard 
to propositional functions, they will only be transformable into statements 
in the class-calculus in cases where the disjunction is constant. This is 
a point which is both important in itself and instructive in its bearings. 
Another way of stating the matter is this: In the proposition: If 

♦ Schroder* Algebra der Logik , Vol. n, pp. 258-9 ; McColl, “Calculus of 
Equivalent Statements,” fifth paper, Proc, Lend, Math, Soc, Vol. auevm, p. 182. 



S3 


85-27] Symbolic Logic 

implies x x > then either <fcc implies x x or ^ x implies x x > the 
implication indicated by if and then is formal, while the subordinate 
implications are material; hence the subordinate implications do not 
lead to the inclusion of one class in another, which results only from 
formal implication. 

The formal laws of addition, multiplication, tautology and negation 
are the same as regards classes and propositions. The law of tautology 
states that no change is made when a class or proposition is added to or 
multiplied by itself. A new feature of the class-calculus is the null-class, 
or class having no terms. This may be defined as the class of terms that 
belong to every class, as the class which does not exist (in the sense 
defined above), as the class which is contained in every class, as the 
class A which is such that the propositional function “x is a A* is false 
for all values of x, or as the class of ar’s satisfying any propositional 
function <f>x which is false for all values of x . All these definitions are 
easily shown to be equivalent 

26. Some important points arise in connection with the theory of 
identity. We have already defined two terms as identical when the 
second belongs to every class to which the first belongs. It is easy to 
show that this definition is symmetrical, and that identity is transitive 
and reflexive (i.e. if x and y, y and z are identical, so are x and z ; and 
whatever x may be, x is identical with x). Diversity is defined as the 
negation of identity. If x be any term, it is necessary to distinguish 
from x the class whose only member is x : this may be defined as the 
class of terms which are identical with x . The necessity for this 
distinction, which results primarily from purely formal considerations, 
was discovered by Peano ; I shall return to it at a later stage. Thus 
the class of even primes is not to be identified with the number 2, and 
the class of numbers which are the sum of 1 and 2 is not to be identified 
with 8. In what, philosophically speaking, the difference consists, is a 
point to be considered in Chapter vi. 

C. The Calculus of Relations . 

27. The calculus of relations is a more modern subject than the 
calculus of classes. Although a few hints for it are to be found in 
De Morgan*, the subject was first developed by C. S. Peirce f* A careful 
analysis of mathematical reasoning shows (as we shall find in the course 
of the present work) that types of relations are the true subject-matter 
discussed, however a bad phraseology may disguise this fact ; hence the 
logic of relations has a more immediate bearing on mathematics than 

* Camb. Phil . Trans. Vol. x, "On the Syllogism, No. iv, and on the Logic of 
Relations." Cf. ib. Vol. ix, p. 104; also his Formal Logic (London, 1847), p. «0. 

t See especially his articles on the Algebra of Logic, American Journal cf 
Mathematic*, Vols. in and vn. The subject is treated at length by C. S. Peirce’s 
methods in Schroder, op. cit. f Vol. ni* 



24 


The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, n 

that of classes or propositions, and any theoretically correct and adequate 
expression of mathematical truths is only possible by its means. Peirce 
and Schroder have realized the great importance of the subject, but 
unfortunately their methods, being based, not on Peano, but on the 
older Symbolic Logic derived (with modifications) from Boole, are so 
cumbrous and difficult that most of the applications which ought to be 
made are practically not feasible. In addition to the defects of the old 
Symbolic Logic, their method suffers technically (whether philosophically 
or not I do not at present discuss) from the fact that they regard a 
relation essentially as a class of couples, thus requiring elaborate 
formulae of summation for dealing with single relations. This view is 
derived, I think, probably unconsciously, from a philosophical error : it 
has always been customary to suppose relational propositions less 
ultimate than class-propositions (or subject-predicate propositions, with 
which class-propositions are habitually confounded), and this has led 
to a desire to treat relations as a kind of classes. However this may 
be, it was certainly from the opposite philosophical belief, which I 
derived from my friend Mr G. E. Moore*, that I was led to a different 
formal treatment of relations. This treatment, whether more philo- 
sophically correct or not, is certainly far more convenient and far more 
powerful as an engine of discovery in actual mathematics f. 

28. If R be a relation, we express by xRy the propositional function 
“ x has the relation R to yT We require a primitive (i.e. indemonstrable) 
proposition to the effect that xRy is a proposition for all values of x 
and y. We then have to consider the following classes : The class of 
terms which have the relation R to some term or other, which I call the 
class of referents with respect to R ; and the class of terms to which 
some term has the relation /?, which I call the class of relata . Thus if 
R be paternity, the referents will be fathers and the relata will be 
children. We have also to consider the corresponding classes with 
respect to particular terms or classes of terms : so-and-so’s children, or 
the children of Londoners, afford illustrations. 

The intensional view of relations here advocated leads to the result 
that two relations may have the same extension without being identical. 
Two relations R, R! are said to be equal or equivalent, or to have the 
same extension, when xRy implies and is implied by xR'y for all values 
of x and y. But there is no need here of a primitive proposition, as 
there was in the case of classes, in order to obtain a relation which is 
determinate when the extension is determinate. We may replace a 
relation R by the logical sum or product of the class of relations 
equivalent to J?, i.e. by the assertion of some or of all such relations; 
and this is identical with the logical sum or product of the class of 
relations equivalent to R\ if R be equivalent to I?. Here we use 

* See his article “ On the Nature of Judgment,’* Mind, N. S. No. 30. 

t See my articles in R. d. M. VoL vn, No. 2 and subsequent numbers. 



27-29] Symbolic Logic 25 

the identity of two classes, which results from the primitive proposition 
as to identity of classes, to establish the identity of two relations — 
a procedure which could not have been applied to classes themselves 
without a vicious circle. 

A primitive proposition in regard to relations is that every relation 
has a converse, i.e. that, if R be any relation, there is a relation R such 
that xRy is equivalent to yRx for all values of x and y. Following 

Schroder, I shall denote the converse of R by R. Greater and less, 
before and after, implying and implied by, are mutually converse 
relations. With some relations, such as identity, diversity, equality, 
inequality, the converse is the same as the original relation: such 
relations are called symmetrical . When the converse is incompatible 
with the original relation, as in such cases as greater and less, I call the 
relation asymmetrical ; in intermediate cases, not -symmetrical. 

The most important of the primitive propositions in this subject is 
that between any two terms there is a relation not holding between any 
two other terms. This is analogous to the principle that any term is 
the only member of some class; but whereas that could be proved, 
owing to the extensional view of classes, this principle, so far as I can 
discover, is incapable of proof. In this point, the extensional view of 
relations has an advantage; but the advantage appears to me to be 
outweighed by other considerations. When relations are considered 
intensionally, it may seem passible to doubt whether the above principle 
is true at all. It will, however, be generally admitted that, of any two 
terms, some propositional function is true which is not true of a certain 
given different pair of terms. If this be admitted, the above principle 
follows by considering the logical product of all the relations that hold 
between our first pair of terms. Thus the above principle may be 
replaced by the following, which is equivalent to it: If xRy implies 
whatever R may be, so long as R is a relation, then x and x\ 
y and y are respectively identical. But this principle introduces a 
logical difficulty from which we have been hitherto exempt, namely a 
variable with a restricted field ; for unless R is a relation, xRy is not a 
proposition at all, true or false, and thus /?, it would seem, cannot take 
all values, but only such as are relations. I shall return to the discussion 
of this point at a later stage. 

29. Other assumptions required are that the negation of a relation 
is a relation, and that the logical product of a class of relations (i.e. the 
assertion of all of them simultaneously) is a relation. Also the relative 
product of two relations must be a relation. The relative product of two 
relations if, S is the relation which holds between x and z whenever 
there is a term y to which x has the relation R and which has to z the 
relation S. Thus the relation of a maternal grandfather to his grandson 
is the relative product of father and mother; that of a paternal grand* 
mother to her grandson is the relative product of mother and fijitherf 



26 The Indefinable* of Mathematics [chap, n 

that of grandparent to grandchild is the relative product of parent and 
parent. The relative product, as these instances show, is not in general 
commutative, and does not in general obey the law of tautology. The 
relative product is a notion of very great importance. Since it does not 
obey the law of tautology, it leads to powers of relations : the square of 
the relation of parent and child is the relation of grandparent and 
grandchild, and so on. Peirce and Schroder consider also what they call 
the relative sum of two relations R and S, which holds between * and a, 
when, if y be any other term whatever, either x has to y the relation R, 
or y has to z the relation S. This is a complicated notion, which, 1 1 have 
found no occasion to employ, and which is introduced only in order to 
preserve the duality of addition and multiplication. This duality, has a 
certain technical charm when the subject is considered as an independent 
branch of mathematics; but when it is considered solely in relation to 
the principles of mathematics, the duality in question appears devoid of 
all philosophical importance. 

30. Mathematics requires, so far as I know, only two other 
primitive propositions, the one that material implication is a relation, 
the other that e (the relation of a term to a class to which it belongs) is 
a relation*. We can now develop the whole of mathematics without 
further assumptions or indefinables. Certain propositions in the logic 
of relations deserve to be mentioned, since they are important, and it 
might be doubted whether they were capable of formal proof. If u, v 
be any two classes, there is a relation R the assertion of which between 
any two terms x and y is equivalent to the assertion that x belongs to u 
and y to ». If u be any class which is not null, there is a relation which 
» ^ term8 .* to an< * w hich holds for no other pairs of terms. If 
M be any relation, and u any class contained in the class of referents 
with respect to R, there is a relation which has u for the class of its 
referents, and is equivalent to R throughout that class ; this relation is 
toe same as R where it holds, but has a more restricted domain. (I use 
afomow* as synonymous with elms of referents.) From this point onwards, 
the development of the subject is technical : special types of relations are 
considered, and special branches of mathematics resuit. 

D. Peano's Symbolic Logic. 

31. So much of the above brief outline of Symbolic Logic is 
inspired by Peano, that it seems desirable to discuss his work explicitly, 
justifying by criticism the points in which I have departed from him. 

question as to which of the notions of symbolic logic are to be 
taken as indefinable, and which of the propositions as indemonstr abl e, 
is, as Professor Peano has insisted f, to some extent arbitrary. But it is 

9* * * di ® Culty in re * pml *° ***** primitive proposition, discussed iu §§ 63, ‘ 

t P. 1901, p. 6 ; F. 1897, Part I, pp. 62-3. 



29 - 82 ] 4 Symbolic Logic 2 7 

important to establish all the mutual relations of the simpler notions 
of logic, and to examine the consequence of taking various notions as 
indefinable. It is necessary to realize that definition, in mathematics, 
does not mean, as in philosophy, an analysis of the idea to be defined 
into constituent ideas. This notion, in any case, is only applicable to 
concepts, whereas in mathematics it is possible to define terms which 
are not concepts* Thus also many notions are defined by symbolic 
logic which are not capable of philosophical definition, since they are 
simple and unanalyzable. Mathematical definition consists in pointing 
out a fixed relation to a fixed term, of which one term only is capable: 
this term is then defined by means of the fixed relation and the fixed 
term. The point in which this differs from philosophical definition 
may be elucidated by the remark that the mathematical definition does 
not point out the term in question, and that only what may be called 
philosophical insight reveals which it is among all the terms there are. 
This is due to the fact that the term is defined by a concept which 
denotes it unambiguously, not by actually mentioning the term denoted. 
What is meant by denoting , as well as the different ways of denoting, 
must be accepted as primitive ideas in any symbolic logic in this 
respect, the order adopted seems not in any degree arbitrary. 

32. For the sake of definiteness, let us now examine some One 
of Professor Peano’s expositions of the subject. In his later expositions} 
he has abandoned the attempt to distinguish clearly certain ideas and 
propositions as primitive, probably because of the realization that any 
such distinction is largely arbitrary. But the distinction appears useful, 
as introducing greater definiteness, and as showing that a certain set 
of primitive ideas and propositions are sufficient; so far from being 
abandoned, it ought rather to be made in every possible way. I shall,, 
therefore, in what follows, expound one of his earlier expositions, that 
of 1897§. 

Hie primitive notions with which Peano starts are the following: 
Class, the relation of an individual to a class of which it is a member, 
the notion of a term, implication where both propositions contain the 
same variables, i.e. formal implication, the simultaneous affirmation of 
two propositions, the notion of definition, and the negation of a pro- 
position. From these notions, together with the division of a complex 
proposition into parts, Peano professes to deduce all symbolic logic by 
means of certain primitive propositions. Let us examine the deduction 
in outline. 

We may observe, to begin with, that the simultaneous affirmation 
of two propositions might seem, at first sight, not enough to take as a 
primitive idea. For although this can be extended, by successive steps, 
to the simultaneous affirmation of any finite number of propositions, 

* See Chap. iv. t See Chap. v. 

4 R> 1901 and JL d. M, Vol. vu, No. 1 (1000). $ R 1807 , PhrtL / 



38 


The Indefinable* of Mathematics [chap. ti 

yet this is not all that is wanted; we require to be able to affirm 
simultaneously all the propositions of any class, finite or infinite. But 
the simultaneous assertion of a class of propositions, oddly enough, is 
much easier to define than that of two propositions (see § 34, (3)). If Ar 
be a class of propositions, their simultaneous affirmation is the assertion 
that 44 jp is a A;” implies p. If this holds, all propositions of the class are 
true; if it fails, one at least must be false. We have seen that the 
logical product of two propositions can be defined in a highly artificial 
manner; but it might almost as well be taken as indefinable, since no 
further property can be proved by means of the definition. We may 
observe, also, that formal and material implication are combined by 
Peano into one primitive idea, whereas they ought to be kept separate. 

33. Before giving any primitive propositions, Peano proceeds to 
some definitions. (1) If a is a class, “ x and y are a\s” is to mean 
“x is an a and y is an a." (2) If a and b are classes, 44 every a is a h " 

means 44 x is an a implies that x is a b If we accept formal implication 
as a primitive notion, this definition seems unobjectionable ; but it may 
well be held that the relation of inclusion between classes is simpler than 
formal implication, and should not be defined by its means. This is a 
difficult question, which I reserve for subsequent discussion. A formal 
implication appears to be the assertion of a whole class of material 
implications. The complication introduced at this point arises from 
the nature of the variable, a point which Peano, though he has done 
very much to show its importance, appears not to have himself suffi- 
ciently considered. The notion of one proposition containing a variable 
implying another such proposition, which he takes as primitive, is 
complex, and should therefore be separated into its constituents ; from 
this separation arises the necessity of considering the simultaneous 
affirmation of a whole class of propositions before interpreting such 
a proposition as “x is an a implies that x is a b” (3) We come next 
to a perfectly worthless definition, which has been since abandoned*. 
This is the definition of such that. The x\ such that x is an a, we are 
told, are to mean the class a. But this only gives the meaning of such 
that when placed before a proposition of the type “ x is an a.” Now 
it is often necessary to consider an x such that some proposition is true 
of it, where this proposition is not of the form “ x is an a." Peano holds 
(though he does not lay it down as an axiom) that every proposition 
containing only one variable is reducible to the form “ x is an at." 
But we shall see (Chap, x) that at least one such proposition is not 
reducible to this form. And in any case, the only utility of such that 
is to effect the reduction, which cannot therefore be assumed to be 
already effected without it. The fact is that such that contains a primi- 
tive idea, but one which it is not easy clearly to disengage from other ideas. 

* In consequence of the criticisms of Padoa, R. d, AT. Vol. vi, p. ] 12. 

i R. d. tf. Vol vii, No. I, p. 25 ; F. 1901, p. 21, § 2, Prop. 4. 0, Note. 



29 


32-84] Symbolic Logic 

In order to grasp the meaning of such that , it is necessary to observe* 
first of all* that what Peano and mathematicians generally call one 
proposition containing a variable is really, if the variable is apparent, . 
the conjunction of a certain class of propositions defined by some 
constancy of form; while if the variable is real, so that we have a 
propositional function, there is not a proposition at all, but merely 
a kind of schematic representation of any proposition of a certain type. 
“ The sum of the angles of a triangle is two right angles,* for example, 
when stated by means of a variable, becomes : Let x be a triangle ; then 
the sum of the angles of x is two right angles. This expresses the 
conjunction of all the propositions in which it is said of particular 
definite entities that if they are triangles, the sum of their angles is 
two right angles. But a propositional function, where the variable is 
real, represents any proposition of a certain form, not all such proposi- 
tions (see §§ 59-62). There is, for each propositional function, an 
indefinable relation between propositions and entities, which may be 
expressed by saying that all the propositions have the same form, 
but different entities enter into them. It is this that gives rise to 
propositional functions. Given, for example, a constant relation and 
a constant term, there is a one-one correspondence between the propo- 
sitions asserting that various terms have the said relation to the said 
term, and the various terms which occur in these propositions. It is 
this notion which is requisite for the comprehension of such that . Let 
a? be a variable whose values form the class a, and let f (x) be a one- 
valued function of x which is a true proposition for all values of x within 
the class a , and which is false for all other values of x . Then the terms 
of a are the class of terms such that f(x) is a true proposition. This 
gives an explanation of sucli that . But it must always be remembered 
that the appearance of having one proposition f(x) satisfied by a 
number of values of x is fallacious : f (x) is not a proposition at all, 
but a propositional function. What is fundamental is the relation of 
various propositions of given form to the various terms entering 
severally into them as arguments or values of the variable; this 
relation is equally required for interpreting the propositional function 
f(x) and the notion such that 9 but is itself ultimate and inexplicable. 
(4) We come next to the definition of the logical product, or 
common part, of two classes. If a and b be two classes, their common 
part consists of the class of terms x such that x is an a and x is a 6. 
Here already, as Padoa points out (loc. cit.), it is necessary to extend the 
meaning of such that beyond the case where our proposition asserts 
membership of a class, since it is only by means of the definition that 
the common part is shown to be a class. 

34. The remainder of the definitions preceding the primitive 
propositions are less important, and may be passed over. Of the 
primitive propositions, some appear to be merely concerned with the 



80 The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, n 

symbolism, and not to express any real properties of what is symbolized ; 
others, on the contrary, are of high logical importance. 

(1) The first of Peano’s axioms is “ every class is contained in 
itself.* This is equivalent to “ every proposition implies itself.* There 
seems no way of evading this axiom, which is equivalent to the law of 
identity, except the method adopted above, of using self-implication 
to define propositions. (2) Next we have the axiom that the product 
of two classes is a class. This ought to have been stated, as ought also 
the definition of the logical product, for a class of classes; for when 
stated for only two classes, it cannot be extended to the logical product 
of an infinite class of classes. If class is taken as indefinable, it is a 
genuine axiom, which is very necessary to reasoning. But it might 
perhaps be somewhat generalized by an axiom concerning the terms 
satisfying propositions of a given form : e.g. “ the terms having one 
or more given relations to one or more given terms form a class.* 
In Section B, above, the axiom was wholly evaded by using a generalized 
form of the axiom as the definition of class . (3) We have next two 

axioms which are really only one, and appear distinct only because Peano 
defines the common part of two classes instead of the common part of a 
class of classes. These two axioms state that, if a, b be classes, their logical 
product, ab y is contained in a and is contained in b. These appear as 
different axioms, because, as far as the symbolism shows, ab might be 
different from ba. It is one of the defects of most symbolisms that they 
give an order to terms which intrinsically have none, or at least none 
that is relevant. So in this case : if AT be a class of classes, the logical 
product of K consists of all terms belonging to every class that belongs 
to K '. With this definition, it becomes at once evident that no order 
of the terms of K is involved. Hence if K has only two terms, a and 6, 
it is indifferent whether we represent the logical product of K by ab 
or by bay since the order exists only in the symbols, not in what is 
symbolized. It is to be observed that the corresponding axiom with 
regard to propositions is, that the simultaneous assertion of a class of 
propositions implies any proposition of the class ; and this is perhaps 
the best form of the axiom. Nevertheless, though an axiom is not 
required, it is necessary, here as elsewhere, to have a means of connecting 
the case where we start from a class of classes or of propositions or of 
relations with the case where the class results from enumeration of its 
terms. Thus although no order is involved in the product of a class of 
propositions, there is an order in the product of two definite proposi- 
tions p, q , and it is significant to assert that the products pq and qp are 
equivalent. But this can be proved by means of the axioms with which 
we began the calculus of propositions (§ 18). It is to be observed that 
this proof is prior to the proof that the class whose terms arep and q is 
identical with the class whose terms are q and p. (4) We have next 
two forms of syllogism, both primitive propositions. The first asserts 



31 


34 , 36 ] Symbolic Logic 

that, if a, ft, c be classes, and a is contained in 6, and x is an a, then x is 
a b ; the second asserts that if a, 6, c be classes, and a is contained in 6, 
b in c, then a is contained in c. It is one of the greatest of Peano’s 
merits to have clearly distinguished the relation of the individual to its 
class from the relation of inclusion between classes. The difference is 
exceedingly fundamental : the former relation is the simplest and most 
essential of all relations, the latter a complicated relation derived from 
logical implication. It results from the distinction that the syllogism 
in Barbara has two forms, usually confounded : the one the time-honoured 
assertion that Socrates is a man, and therefore mortal, the other the 
assertion that Greeks are men, and therefore mortal. These two forms 
are stated by Peano’s axioms. It is to be observed that, in virtue of the 
definition of what is meant by one class being contained in another, 
the first form results from the axiom that, if p, q, r be propositions, and 
p implies that q implies r, then the product of p and q implies r. This 
axiom is now substituted by Peano for the first form of the syllogism*: 
it is more general and cannot be deduced from the said form. The 
second form of the syllogism, when applied to propositions instead of 
classes, asserts that implication is transitive. This principle is, of course, 
the very life of all chains of reasoning. (5) We have next a principle 
of reasoning which Peano calls composition : this asserts that if a is 
contained in b and also in c, then it is contained in the common part 
of both. Stating this principle with regard to propositions, it asserts 
that if a proposition implies each of two others, then it implies their 
joint assertion or logical product ; and this is the principle which was 
called composition above. 

36. From this point, we advance successfully until we require the 
idea of negation . This is taken, in the edition of the Formulaire we are 
considering, as a new primitive idea, and disjunction is defined by its 
means. By means of the negation of a proposition, it is of course easy 
to define the negation of a class : for “ sc is a not-a 11 is equivalent to “ x 
is not an a.” But we require an axiom to the effect that not-a is a 
class, and another to the effect that not -not -a is a. Peano gives also a 
third axiom, namely : If a, 6, c be classes, and ab is contained in c, and x 
is an a but not a c, then x is not a 6. This is simpler in the form : If p, 
g, r be propositions, and p, q together imply r, and q is true while r is 
false, then q is false. This would be still further improved by being put 
in the form : If q 9 r are propositions, and q implies r, then not-r implies 
not-*;; a form which Peano obtains as a deduction. By dealing with* 
propositions before classes or propositional functions, it is possible, a$ we 
saw, to avoid treating negation as a primitive idea, and to replace all 
axioms respecting negation by the principle of reduction. 

We come next to the definition of the disjunction or logical sum of 
two classes. On this subject Peano has many times changed his 
* See e. 0 . F . 1901, Part I, § 1, Prop. 3. 3 (p. 10). 



82 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, n 

procedure. In the edition we are considering, “ a or b " is defined as the 
negation of the logical product of not-a and not-6, i.e. as the class of 
terms which are not both not-a and not-6. In later editions (eg. F. 1901, 
p. 19), we find a somewhat less artificial definition, namely: “a or b* 
consists of all terms which belong to any class which contains a and 
contains 6. Either definition seems logically unobjectionable. It is to 
be observed that a and b are classes, and that it remains a question for 
philosophical logic whether there is not a quite different notion of the 
disjunction of individuals, as e.g. “Brown or Jones. ^ I shall consider 
this question in Chapter v. It will be remembered that, when we begin 
by the calculus of propositions, disjunction is defined before negation; 
with the above definition (that of 1897), it is plainly necessary t6 take 
negation first. 

36 . The connected notions of the null-class and the existence of a 
class are next dealt with. In the edition of 1897, a class is defined as 
null when it is contained in every class. When we remember the 
definition of one class a being contained in another b ( u x is an a” 
implies “x is a b™ for all values of x\ we see that we are to regard 
the implication as holding for all values, and not only for those values 
for which x really is an a. This is a point upon which Peano is not 
explicit, and I doubt whether he has made up his mind on it. If the 
implication were only to hold when x really is an a, it would not give a 
definition of the null-class, for which this hypothesis is false for all values 
of x. I do not know whether it is for this reason or for some other that 
Peano has since abandoned the definition of the inclusion of classes 
by means of formal implication between propositional functions : the 
inclusion of classes appears to be now regarded as indefinable. Another 
definition which Peano has sometimes favoured (e.g. F. 1895, Errata, 
p. 116) is, that the null-class is the product of any class into its 
negation — a definition to which similar remarks apply. In R. d. M. vn. 
No. 1 (§ 3, Prop. 1. 0), the null -class is defined as the class of those terms 
that belong to every class, i.e. the class of terms x such that “a is a 
class * implies “ x is an a ” for all values of a. There are of course no 
such terms x ; and there is a grave logical difficulty in trying to interpret 
extensionally a class which has no extension. This point is one to which 
I shall return in Chapter vi. 

From this [joint onward, Peano’s logic proceeds by a smooth develop- 
ment. But in one respect it is still defective : it does not recognize as 
ultimate relational propositions not asserting membership of a class. 
For this reason, the definitions of a function* and of other essentially 
relational notions are defective. But this defect is easily remedied by 
applying, in the manner explained above, the principles of the 
Fortmdaire to the logic of relations f. 

* Kg. F. 1001, Part I, § 10, Props. 1. 0. 01 (p. 33). 

t See my article “Sur la logique ties relations/’ R. d. M. Vol. vii, 2 (1901). 



CHAPTER III. 


IMPLICATION AND FORMAL IMPLICATION. 

37. In the preceding chapter I endeavoured to present, briefly and 
uncritically, all the data, in the shape of formally fundamental ideas 
and propositions, that pure mathematics requires. In subsequent Parts 
I shall show that these are all the data by giving definitions of the 
various mathematical concepts — number, infinity, continuity, the various 
spaces of geometry, and motion. In the remainder of Part I, I shall 
give indications, as best I can, of the philosophical problems arising in 
the analysis of the data, and of the directions in which I imagine these 
problems to be probably soluble. Some logical notions will be elicited 
which, though they seem quite fundamental to logic, are not commonly 
discussed in works on the subject ; and thus problems no longer clothed 
in mathematical symbolism will be presented for the consideration of 
philosophical logicians. 

Two kinds of implication, the material and the formal, were found to 
be essential to every kind of deduction. In the present chapter I wish 
to examine and distinguish these two kinds, and to discuss some methods 
of attempting to analyze the second of them. 

In the discussion of inference, it is common to permit the intrusion 
of a psychological element, and to consider our acquisition of new 
knowledge by its means. But it is plain that where we validly infer one 
proposition from another, we do so in virtue of a relation which holds 
between the two propositions whether we perceive it or not : the mind, 
in fact, is as purely receptive in inference as common sense supposes it to 
be in perception of sensible objects. The relation in virtue of which it 
is possible for us validly to infer is what I call material implication. 
We have already seen that it would be a vicious circle to define this 
relation as meaning that if one proposition is true, then another is true, 
for if and then already involve implication. The relation holds, in fact, 
when it does hold, without any reference to the truth or falsehood of the 
propositions involved. 

But in developing the consequences of our assumptions as to impli- 
cation, we were led to conclusions which do not by any means agree with 



34 


The Indefinable* of Mathematics [chap* m 

what is commonly held concerning implication, for we found that any 
false proposition implies every proposition and any true proposition is 
implied by every proposition. Thus propositions are formally like a set 
of lengths each of which is one inch or two, and implication is like the 
relation “equal to or less than** 1 among such lengths. It would certainly 
not be commonly maintained that “2 + 2 = 4” can be deduced from 
“Socrates is a man,” or that both are implied by “Socrates is a triangle 
But the reluctance to admit such implications is chiefly due, I think, to 
preoccupation with formal implication, which is a much more familiar 
notion, and is really before the mind, as a rule, even where material 
implication is what is explicitly mentioned. In inferences from “Socrates 
is a man,” it is customary not to consider the philosopher who vexed the 
Athenians, but to regard Socrates merely as a symbol, capable of being 
replaced by any other man ; and only a vulgar prejudice in favour of 
true propositions stands in the way of replacing Socrates by a number, a 
table, or a plum-pudding. Nevertheless, wherever, as in Euclid, one 
particular proposition is deduced from another, material implication is 
involved, though as a rule the material implication may be regarded as a 
particular instance of some formal implication, obtained by giving some 
constant value to the variable or variables involved in the said formal 
implication. And although, while relations are still regarded with the 
awe caused by unfamiliarity, it is natural to doubt whether any such 
relation as implication is to be found, yet, in virtue of the general 
principles laid down in Section C of the preceding chapter, there must 
be a relation holding between nothing except propositions, and holding 
between any two propositions of which either the first is false or the 
second true. Of the various equivalent relations satisfying these 
conditions, one is to be called . implication^ and if such a notion seems 
unfamiliar, that does not suffice to prove that it is illusory. 

38. At this point, it is necessary to consider a very difficult 
logical problem, namely, the distinction between a proposition actually 
asserted, and a proposition considered merely as a complex concept. 
One of our indemonstrable principles was, it will be remembered, that 
if the hypothesis in an implication is true, it may be dropped, and the 
consequent asserted. This principle, it was observed, eludes formal 
statement, and points to a certain failure of formalism in general. The 
principle is employed whenever a proposition is said to be proved ; for 
what happens is, in all such cases, that the proposition is shown to be 
implied by some true proposition. Another form in which the principle 
is constantly employed is the substitution of a constant, satisfying the 
hypothesis, in the consequent of a formal implication. If fa implies fa 
far all values of x 9 and if a is a constant satisfying fa 9 we can assert 
^ro, dropping the true hypothesis fa This occurs, for example, when- 
ever any of those rules of inference which employ the hypothesis 
that the variables involved are propositions, are applied to particular 



85 


37 — 89 ] Implication and Formal Implication 

propositions* The principle in question is, therefore, quite vital to any 
kind of demonstration. 

The independence of this principle is brought out by a consideration 
of Lewis Carroirs puzzle, “ What the Tortoise said to Achilles* " The 
principles of inference which we accepted lead to the proposition that, if 
p and q be propositions, then p together with u p implies q * implies 5. 
At first sight, it might be thought that this would enable us to assert q 
provided p is true and implies q. But the puzzle in question shows that 
this is not the case, and that, until we have some new principle, we shall 
only be led into an endless regress of more and more complicated impli- 
cations, without ever arriving at the assertion of q. We need, in fact, 
the notion of therefore , which is quite different from the notion of implies 
and holds between different entities. In grammar, the distinction is that 
between a verb and a verbal noun, between, say, “ A is greater than B* 
and “ A s being greater than B." In the first of these, a proposition is 
actually asserted, whereas in the second it is merely considered. Bui 
these are psychological terms, whereas the difference which 1 desire to 
express is genuinely logical. It is plain that, if I may be allowed to 
use the word assertion in a non -psychological sense, the proposition 
“p implies q 11 asserts an implication, though it does not assert p or q . 
The p and the q which enter into this proposition are not strictly the 
same as the p or the q which are separate propositions, at least, if they 
are true. The question is: How does a proposition differ by being 
actually true from what it would be as an entity if it were not true ? It 
is plain that true and false propositions alike are entities of a kind, but 
that true propositions have a quality not belonging to false ones, a 
quality which, in a non -psychological sense, may be called being 
asserted. Yet there are grave difficulties in forming a consistent theory 
on this point, for if assertion in any way changed a proposition, no 
proposition which can possibly in any context be unasserted could be 
true, since when asserted it would become a different proposition. But 
this is plainly false ; for in u p implies 5,” p and q are not asserted, and 
yet they may be true. Leaving this puzzle to logic, however, we must 
insist that there is a difference of some kind between an asserted and an 
unasserted proposition f. When we say therefore , we state a relation 
which can only hold between asserted propositions, and which thus 
differs from implication. Wherever therefore occurs, the hypothesis 
may be dropped, and the conclusion asserted by itself. This seems to 
be the first step in answering Lewis Carroll’s puzzle. 

39 * It is commonly said that an inference must have premisses 
and a conclusion, and it is held, apparently, that two or more premisses 
are necessary, if not to all inferences, yet to most. This view is borne 
out, at first sight, by obvious facts : every syllogism, for example, is held 

* Mind , N. S. Vol. iv, p. 278. 

t Frege (loc. tit.) has a special symbol to denote assertion. 



36 


The Indejinables of Mathematics [chap, ill 

to have two premisses. Now such a theory greatly complicates the 
relation of implication, since it renders it a relation which may have any 
number of terms, and is symmetrical with respect to all but one of them, 
but not symmetrical with respect to that one (the conclusion). This 
complication is, however, unnecessary, first, because every simultaneous 
assertion of a number of propositions is itself a single proposition, and 
secondly, because, by the rule which we called exportation, it is always 
possible to exhibit an implication explicitly as holding between single 
propositions. To take the first point first: if k be a class of proposi- 
tions, all the propositions of the class k are asserted by the single 
proposition “for all values of x , if x implies x , then 4 x is a k ' implies 
x ,” or, in more ordinary language, 44 every k is true.” And as regards 
the second point, which assumes the number of premisses to be finite, 
“/*/ implies r” is equivalent, if q be a proposition, to 44 implies that q 
implies r,” in which latter form the implications hold explicitly between 
single proposi lions. Hence we may safely hold implication to lx? a 
relation between two propositions, not a relation of an arbitrary number 
of premisses to a single conclusion. 

40. I come now to formal implication, which is a far more difficult 
notion than material implication. In order to avoid the general notion 
of propositional function, let us begin by the discussion of a particular 
instance, say u *r is a man implies x is a mortal for all values of x” 
This proposition is equivalent, to 44 all men are mortal” 44 every man is 
mortal 11 and “ any man is mortal.” Hut it seems highly doubtful 
whether it is the same proposition. It is also connected with a purely 
intensional proposition in which man is asserted to be a complex notion 
of which mortal is a constituent, but this proposition is quite distinct 
from the one we are discussing. Indeed, such intensional propositions 
are not always present where one class is included in another : in general, 
either class may be defined by various different predicates, and it is by 
no means necessary that every predicate of the smaller class should 
contain every predicate of the larger class as a factor. Indeed, it may 
very well happen that both predicates are philosophically simple: thus 
colour and existent appear to be both simple, yet the class of colours is 
part, of the class of existents. The intensional view', derived from 
predicates, is in the main irrelevant to Symbolic Logic and to Mathe- 
matics, and I shall not consider it further at present. 

41. It may be doubted, to begin with, whether 44 x is a man 
implies x is a mortal ” is to bo regarded as asserted strictly of all possible 
terms, or only of such terms as are men. Peano, though he is not explicit, 
appears to hold the latter view. Hut in this case, the hypothesis ceases 
to be significant, and becomes a mere definition of x : x is to mean any 
man. The hypothesis then becomes a mere assertion concerning the 
meaning of the symbol x n and the whole of what is asserted concerning 
the matter dealt with by our symbol is put into the conclusion. The 



37 


39 - 41 ] Implication and Formal Implication 

premiss says : x is to mean any man. The conclusion says : x is mortal. 
But the implication is merely concerning the symbolism : since any man 
is mortal, if x denotes any man, x is mortal. Thus formal implication, 
on this view, has wholly disappeared, leaving us the proposition “ any 
man is mortal'” as expressing the whole of what is relevant in the 
proposition with a variable. It would now only remain to examine 
the proposition “any man is mortal/’' and if possible to explain this 
proposition without reintroducing the \ariable and formal implication. 
It must be confessed that some grave difficulties are avoided by this 
view. Consider, for example, the simultaneous assertion of all the 
propositions of some class k: this is not expressed by “\r is a k 1 implies 
x tor all values of x." For as it stands, this proposition does not express 
what is meant, since, if x be not a proposition, “.r is a k " cannot imply 
x ; hence the range of variability of ,/ must be confined to propositions, 
unless we prefix (as above, § J39) the hypothesis “.r implies x" This 
remark applies generally, throughout the propositional calculus, to all 
cases where the conclusion is represented In a single letter: unless the 
letter does actually represent a proposition, the implication asserted will 
be false, since only propositions can be implied. The point is that, if x 
Ik* our variable, x itself is a proposition for all values of x which are 
propositions, but not for other values. This makes it plain what the 
limitations an* to which our variable is subject: it must vary only within 
the range of values for which the two sides of the principal implication 
are propositions, in other words, the two sides, when the variable is not 
replaced In a constant, must be genuine propositional functions. If this 
restriction is not observed, fallacies quickly begin to appear. It should lie 
noticed that there may be any munlicr of subordinate implications which 
do not require that their terms should be propositions: it is only of the 
principal implication that this is required. Take, for example, the first 
principle of inference: If p implies <p then p implies q. This holds 
equally whether p and q be propositions or not; for if either is not a 
proposition, “ j) implies q" becomes false, but does not cease to be a 
proposition. In fact, in virtue of the definition of a proposition, our 
principle states that “ ]) implies q " is a propositional function, ix. that 
it is a proposition for all values of p and q. But if we apply the 
principle of importation to this proposition, so as to obtain u 4 p implies 
qj together with implies q? we have a formula which is only true 
when p ami q are propositions : in order to make it true universally, we 
must preface it by the hypothesis p implies p and q implies q." In this 
way, in many cases, if not in all, the restriction on the variability of the 
variable can be removed ; thus, in the assertion of the logical product of 
a class of propositions, the formula “if x implies j”, then ‘.r is a 
implies x" appears unobjectionable, and allows x to vary without restric- 
tion. Here the subordinate implications in the premiss and the conclusion 
are material : only the principal implication is formal. 



38 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, in 

Returning now to “ x is a man implies x is a mortal,” it is plain that 
no restriction is required in order to insure our having a genuine pro- 
position. And it is plain that, although we might restrict the values of 
x to men, and although this seems to be done in the proposition 
“ all men are mortal,” yet there is no reason, so far as the truth of our 
proposition is concerned, why we should so restrict our x. Whether x 
be a man or not, “ x is a man” is always, when a constant is substituted 
for x , a proposition implying, for that value of x> the proposition “ x is 
a mortal.” And unless we admit the hypothesis equally in the cases 
where it is false, we shall find it impossible to deal satisfactorily with the 
null -class or with null propositional functions. We must, therefore, 
allow our x , wherever the truth of our formal implication is thereby 
unimpaired, to take all values without exception; and where any 
restriction on variability is required, the implication is not to be 
regarded as formal until the said restriction has been removed by being 
prefixed as hypothesis. (If \jrx be a proposition whenever x satisfies <f>x, 
where <px is a propositional function, and if yjrx, whenever it is a pro- 
position, implies %x, then “yfrx implies yap™ is not a formal implication, 
but “ <f>x implies that yfrx implies t yx ln is a formal implication.) 

42. It is to be observed that u x is a man implies x is a mortal ” 
is not a relation of two propositional functions, but is itself a single 
propositional function having the elegant property of being always 
true. For u x is a man” is, as it stands, not a proposition at all, 
and does not imply anything ; and we must not first vary our x in 
“x is a man,” and then independently vary it in “ x is a mortal,” 
for this would lead to the proposition that “ everything is a man ” 
implies “everything is a mortal,” which, though true, is not what was 
meant. This proposition would have to be expressed, if the language 
of variables were retained, by two variables, as “ x is a man implies 
y is a mortal.” But this formula too is unsatisfactory, for its natural 
meaning would be : “If anything is a man, then everything is a mortal.” 
The point to be emphasized is, of course, that our x , though variable, 
must be the same on both sides of the implication, and this requires 
that we should not obtain our formal implication by first varying (say) 
Socrates in “Socrates is a man,” and then in “Socrates is a mortal,” 
but that we should start from the whole proposition “ Socrates is a 
man implies Socrates is a mortal,” and vary Socrates in this proposition 
as a whole. Thus our formal implication asserts a class of implications, 
not a single implication at all. We do not, in a word, have one im- 
plication containing a variable, but rather a variable implication. We 
have a class of implications, no one of which contains a variable, and 
we assert that every member of this class is true. This is a first step 
towards the analysis of the mathematical notion of the variable. 

But, it may be asked, how comes it that Socrates may be varied 
in the proposition “ Socrates is a man implies Socrates is mortal”? In 



41 - 44 ] Implication and Formal Implication 39 

virtue of the fact that true propositions are implied by all others, we 
have “ Socrates is a man implies Socrates is a philosopher 11 ; but in this 
proposition, alas, the variability of Socrates is sadly restricted. This 
seems to show that formal implication involves something over and 
above the relation of implication, and that some additional relation 
must hold where a term can be varied. In the case in question, it is 
natural to say that what is involved is the relation of inclusion between 
the classes men and mortals — the very relation which was to be defined 
and explained bv our formal implication. But this view is too simple 
to meet all cases, and is therefore not required in any case. A larger 
number of cases, though still not all cases, can lx? dealt with by the 
notion of what I shall call assertions. This notion must now be briefly 
explained, leaving its critical discussion to Chapter vn. 

43 . It has always been customary to divide propositions into 
subject and predicate ; but this division has the defect of omitting the 
verb. It is true that a graceful concession is sometimes made by loose 
talk about the copula, but the verb deserves far more respect than is 
thus paid to it. We may say, broadly, that every proposition may be 
divided, some in only one way, some in several ways, into a term (the 
subject) and something which is said about the subject, which something 
I shall call the assertion. Thus “ Socrates is a man 11 may l>e divided 
into Socrates and is a man. The verb, which is the distinguishing mark 
of propositions, remains with the assertion ; but the assertion itself, 
being robbed of its subject, is neither true nor false. In logical dis- 
cussions, the notion of assertion often occurs, but as the word projxhvtion 
is used for it, it does not obtain separate consideration. Consider, for 
example, the best statement of the identity of indiscernibles : “ If x and y 
be any two diverse entities, some assertion holds of x which does not 
hold of yP But for the word assertion , which would ordinarily be 
replaced by proposition , this statement is one which would commonly 
pass unchallenged. Again, it might be said: “Socrates was a philo- 
sopher, and the same is true of Plato . 11 Such statements require the 
analysis of a proposition into an assertion and a subject, in order that 
there may be something identical which can be said to be affirmed of 
two subjects. 

44 . We can now see how, where the analysis into subject and 
assertion is legitimate, to distinguish implications in which there is a 
term which can be varied from others in which this is not the case. Two 
ways of making the distinction may be suggested, and we shall have to 
decide between them. It may be said that there is a relation between 
the two assertions “is a man 11 and “is a mortal , 11 in virtue of which, 
when the one holds, so does the other. Or again, we may analyze the 
whole proposition “Socrates. is a man implies Socrates is a mortal 11 into 
Socrates and an assertion about him, and say that the assertion in 
question holds of all terms. Neither of these theories replaces the above 



40 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, m 

analysis of is a man implies x is a mortal 77 into a class of material 
implications ; but whichever of the two is true carries the analysis one 
step further. The first theory suffers from the difficulty that it is 
essential to the relation of assertions involved that both assertions 
should be made of the same subject, though it is otherwise irrelevant 
what subject we choose. The second theory appears objectionable on 
the ground that the suggested analysis of “ Socrates is a man implies 
Socrates is a mortal 77 seems scarcely possible. The proposition in 
question consists of two terms and a relation, the terms being “Socrates 
is a man'” and “ Socrates is a mortal 71 ; and it would seem that when a 
relational proposition is analyzed into a subject and an assertion, the 
subject must lie one of the terms of the relation which is asserted. This 
objection seems graver than that against the former view; I shall 
therefore, at any rate for the present, adopt the former view, and regard 
formal implication as derived from a relation between assertions. 

We remarked above that the relation of inclusion between classes is 
insufficient. This results from the irreducible nature of relational 
propositions. Take e.g. “Socrates is married implies Socrates had a 
father.*” Here it is affirmed that because Socrates has one relation, 
he must have another. Or better still, take “ A is before B implies B is 
after AT This is a formal implication, in which the assertions are 
(superficially at least) concerning different subjects; the only way to 
avoid this is to say that both propositions have both A and B as 
subjects, which, by the way, is quite different from saying that they 
have the one subject “ A and B , . 77 Such instances make it plain that 
the notion of a propositional function, and the notion of an assertion, 
are more fundamental than the notion of class , and that the latter is 
not adequate to explain all cases of formal implication. I shall not 
enlarge upon this point now, as it will be abundantly illustrated in 
subsequent portions of the present work. 

It is important to realize that, according to the above analysis of 
formal implication, the notion of every term is indefinable and ultimate. 
A formal implication is one which holds of every term, and therefore 
every cannot lie explained by means of formal implication. If a and b 
be classes, we can explain “every a is a 6 77 by means of “ x is an a 
implies x is a ft 77 ; but the every which occurs here is a derivative and 
subsequent notion, presupposing the notion of every term . It seems 
to be the very essence of w hat may be called a formal truth, and of 
formal reasoning generally, that some assertion is affirmed to hold of 
every term ; and unless the notion of every term is admitted, formal 
truths are impossible. 

45. The fundamental importance of formal implication is brought 
out by the consideration that it is involved in all the rules of inference. 
This shows that we cannot hope wholly to define it in terms of material 
implication, but that some further element or elements must be involved. 



41 


44 , 45 ] Implication and Formal Implication 

We may observe, however, that, in a particular inference, the rule 
according to which the inference proceeds is not required as a premiss. 
This point has been emphasized by Mr Bradley*; it is closely connected 
with the principle of dropping a true premiss, being again a respect 
in which formalism breaks down. In order to apply a rule of inference, 
it is formally necessary to have a premiss asserting that the present 
case is an instance of the rule; we shall then need to affirm the rule by 
which we can go from the rule to an instance, and also to affirm that here 
we have an instance of this rule, and so on into an endless process. 
The fact is, of course, that any implication warranted by a rule of 
inference does actually hold, and is not merely implied by the rule. 
This is simply an instance of the non-formal principle of dropping a 
true premiss: if our rule implies a certain implication, the rule may be 
dropped and the implication asserted. But it remains the case that the 
fact that our rule does imply the said implication, if introduced at all, 
must be simply perceived, and is not guaranteed by any formal deduction; 
and often it is just as easy, and consequently just as legitimate, to perceive 
immediately the implication in question as to perceive that it is implied 
by one or more of the rules of inference. 

To sum up our discussion of formal implication : a formal implication, 
we said, is the affirmation of every material implication of a certain 
class; and the class of material implications involved is, in simple cases, 
the class of all propositions in which a given fixed assertion, made con- 
cerning a certain subject or subjects, is affirmed to imply another given 
fixed assertion concerning the same subject or subjects. Where a formal 
implication holds, we agreed to regal’d it, wherever possible, as due to 
some relation between the assertions concerned. This theory raises many 
formidable logical problems, and requires, for its defence, a thorough 
analysis of the constituents of propositions. To this task we must now 
address ourselves. 


* Ijogic, Book II, Part I, ('hap. h (p. 227). 



CHAPTER IV. 


PROPER NAMES, ADJECTIVES, AND VERBS. 

46. In the present chapter, certain questions are to be discussed 
belonging to what may be called philosophical grammar. The study 
of grammar, in my opinion, is capable of throwing far more light on 
philosophical questions than is commonly supposed by philosophers. 
Although a grammatical distinction cannot be uncritically assumed to 
correspond to a genuine philosophical difference, yet the one is prima 
fade evidence of the other, and may often be most usefully employed 
as a source of discovery. Moreover, it must be admitted, I think, that 
every won! occurring in a sentence must have some meaning : a perfectly 
meaningless sound could not lie employed in the more or less fixed 
way in which language employs words. The correctness of our philo- 
sophical analysis of a proposition may therefore be usefully checked 
by the exercise of assigning the meaning of each word in the sentence 
expressing the proposition. On the whole, grammar seems to me to 
bring us much nearer to a correct logic than the current opinions of 
philosophers; and in w'hat follows, grammar, though not our master, 
will yet be taken as our guide*. 

Of the parts of speech, three are specially important : substantives, 
adjectives, and verbs. Among substantives, some are derived from 
adjectives or verbs, as humanity from human, or sequence from follows. 
(I am not speaking of an etymological derivation, but of a logical one.) 
Others, such as proper names, or space, time, and matter, are not 
derivative, but appear primarily as substantives. What we wish to 
obtain is a classification, not of words, but of ideas ; I shall therefore 
call adjectives or predicates all notions which are capable of being such, 
even in a form in which grammar would call them substantives. The 
fact is, as we shall sec, that human and humanity denote precisely 
the same concept, these words being employed respectively according to 
the kind of relation in which this concept stands to the other constituents 
of a proposition in which it occurs. The distinction which we require 

* The excellence of grammar as a guide is proportional to the paucity of 
inflexions, i.e. to the degree of analysis effected by the language considered. 



43 


46, 47] Proper Names , Adjectives, and Verbs 

is not identical with the grammatical distinction between substantive 
and adjective, since one single concept may, according, to circumstances, 
be either substantive or adjective : it is the distinction between proper 
and general names that we require, or rather between the objects in- 
dicated by such names. In every proposition, as we saw in Chapter iii, 
we may make an analysis into something asserted and something about 
which the assertion is made. A proper name, when it occurs in a 
proposition, is always, at least according to one of the possible ways 
of analysis (where there are several), the subject that the proposition 
or some subordinate constituent proposition is about, and not what is 
said about the subject. Adjectives and verbs, on the other hand, 
are capable of occurring in propositions in which they cannot be 
regarded as subject, but only as parts of the assertion. Adjectives 
are distinguished by capacity for denoting — a term which I intend 
to use in a technical sense to be discussed in Chapter v. Verbs 
are distinguished by a special kind of connection, exceedingly hard 
to define, with truth and falsehood, in virtue of which they dis- 
tinguish an asserted proposition from an unasserted one, e.g. “Caesar 
died 17 from “the death of Caesar . 11 These distinctions must now be 
amplified, and I shall begin with the distinction between general and 
proper names. 

47. Philosophy is familiar with a certain set of distinctions, all 
more or less equi valent : I mean, the distinctions of subject and pre- 
dicate, substance and attribute, substantive and adjective, this and 
what*. I wish now to point out briefly what appears to me to be the 
truth concerning these cognate distinctions. The subject is important, 
since the issues between monism and monadism, between idealism and 
empiricism, and between those who maintain and those who deny that 
all truth is concerned with what exists, all depend, in whole or in part, 
upon the theory we adopt in regard to the present question. But the 
.subject is treated here only because it is essential to any doctrine of 
number or of the nature of the variable. Its bearings on general 
philosophy, important as they are, will be left wholly out of account. 

Whatever may be an object of thought, or may occur in any true 
or false proposition, or can be counted as one , I call a term. This, 
then, is the widest word in the philosophical vocabulary. I shall use 
as synonymous with it the words unit, individual, and entity. The 
first two emphasize the fact that every term is one , while the third is 
•derived from the fact that every term has being, i.e. is in some sense. 
A man, a moment, a number, a class, a relation, a chimaera, or anything 
else that can be mentioned, is sure to be a term ; and to deny that such 
and such a thing is a term must always be false. 

It might perhaps be thought that a wofd of such extreme generality 
could not be of any great use. Such a view, however, owing to certain 
* This last pair of terms is due to Mr Bradley . 



44 


The Indefinable s of Mathematics [ chap , iv 

wide-spread philosophical doctrines, would be erroneous. A term is, 
in fact, possessed of all the properties commonly assigned to substances 
or substantives. Every term, to begin with, is a logical subject: it is, 
for example, the subject of the proposition that itself is one. Again 
every term is immutable and indestructible. What a term is, it is, and 
no change can be conceived in it which would not destroy its identity 
and make it another term*. Another mark which belongs to terms 
is numerical identity w r ith themselves and numerical diversity from all 
other terms f- Numerical identity and diversity are the source of unity 
and plurality ; and thus the admission of many terms destroys monism. 
And it seems undeniable that every constituent of every proposition can 
be counted as one, and that no proposition contains less than two 
constituents. Term is, therefore, a useful word, since it marks dissent 
from various philosophies, as well as because, in many statements, we 
wish to s[>eak of any term or some term. 

48. Among terms, it is possible to distinguish two kinds, which 
I shall call respectively things and concepts. The former are the terms 
indicated by proper names, the latter those indicated by all other words. 
Here proper names are to be understood in a somewhat wider sense than 
is usual, and things also are to be understood as embracing all par- 
ticular points and instants, and many other entities not commonly called 
things. Among concepts, again, two kinds at least must be distinguished, 
namely those indicated by adjectives and those indicated by verbs. The 
former kind will often be called predicates or class-concepts ; the latter 
are always or almost always relations. (In intransitive verbs, the notion 
expressed by the verb is complex, and usually asserts a definite relation 
to an indefinite relatum, as in “Smith breathes. ”) 

In a large class of propositions, we agreed, it is possible, in one or 
more ways, to distinguish a subject and an assertion about the subject. 
The assertion must always contain a verb, but except in this respect, 
assertions appear to have no universal properties. In a relational 
proposition, say “A is greater than Bf* we may regard A as the subject, 
and “ is greater than B 11 as the assertion, or B as the subject and “ A is 
greater than ” as the assertion. There are thus, in the case proposed, 
two ways of analyzing the proposition into subject and assertion. 
Where a relation has more than two terms, as in “ A is here now 
there will be more than two ways of making the analysis. But in 
some propositions, there is only a single way : these are the subject- 

* The notion of a term here set forth is a modification of Mr G. E. Moore’s 
notion of a concept in his article “On the Nature of Judgment,” Mind, N. S. No. 30, 
from which notion, however, it differs in some important respects. 

t On identity, see Mr G. E. Moore’s article in the Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society , 1000-1901. 

J This proposition means “ A is in this place at this time.” It will be shown in 
Part VII that the relation expressed is not reducible to a two-term relation. 



45 


47 - 49 ] Proper Names , Adjectives , and Verbs 

predicate propositions, such as “Socrates is human.” The proposition 
“humanity belongs to Socrates,” which is equi valent to “Socrates is 
human,” is an assertion about humanity ; but it is a distinct propo- 
sition. In “ Socrates is human,” the notion expressed by human occurs 
in a different way from that in which it occurs when it is called 
humanity , the difference being that in the latter case, but not in the 
former, the proposition is about this notion. This indicates that 
humanity is a concept, not a thing. I shall speak of the term .v of a 
proposition as those terms, however numerous, which occur in a propo- 
sition and may l>e regarded as subjects about which the proposition is. 
It is a characteristic of the terms of a proposition that any one of 
them may be replaced by any other entity without our ceasing to have 
a proposition. Thus we shall say that “ Socrates is human ” is a 
proposition having only one term ; of the remaining components of 
the proposition, one is the verb, the other is a jrredieate. With the sense 
which is has in this proposition, we no longer have a proposition at all 
if we replace human by something other than a predicate. Predicates, 
then, are concepts, other than verbs, which occur in propositions having 
only one term or subject. Socrates is a thing, because Socrates can 
never occur otherwise than as term in a proposition : Socrates is not 
capable of that curious twofold use which is involved in human and 
humanity. Points, instants, bits of matter, particular states of mind, 
and particular existents generally, are things in the above sense, and 
so are many terms which do not exist, for example, the points in a 
non -Euclidean space and the pseudo-existents of a novel. All classes, 
it would seem, as numbers, men, spaces, etc., when taken as single terms, 
are things ; but this is a point for Chapter vi. 

Predicates are distinguished from other terms by a number of very 
interesting properties, chief among which is their connection with what 
I shall call denoting. One predicate always gives rise to a host of 
cognate notions : thus in addition to human and humanity , which 
only differ grammatically, we have man, a man , some man , any man , 
every man , all men*, all of which appear to be genuinely distinct one 
from another. The study of these various notions is absolutely vital 
to any philosophy of mathematics ; and it is on account of them that 
the theory of predicates is important. 

49 . It might be thought that a distinction ought to lie made 
between a concept as such and a concept used as a term, between, 
e.g., such pairs as is and being , human and humanity , one in such a 
proposition as “this is one” and'l in “1 is a number.” But inex- 
tricable difficulties will envelop us if we allow' such a view. There is, 

* X use all men as collective, i.e. as nearly synonymous with the human race , but 
differing therefrom by being many and not one. I shall always use all collectively, 
confining myself to every for the distributive sense. Thus I shall say “ every man is 
mortal,” not “all men are mortal.” 



46 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, iv 

of course, a grammatical difference, and this corresponds to a difference 
as regards relations. In the first case, the concept in question is used 
as a concept, that is, it is actually predicated of a term or asserted to 
relate two or more terms ; while in the second case, the concept is 
itself said to have a predicate or a relation. Inhere is, therefore, 
no difficulty in accounting for the grammatical difference. But what 
I wish to urge is, that the difference lies solely in external relations, 
and not in the intrinsic nature of the terms. For suppose that one 
as adjective differed from 1 as term. In this statement, one as 
adjective has been made into a term ; hence either it has become 
1, in which case the supposition is self-contradictory ; or there is some 
other difference between one and 1 in addition to the fact that the 
first denotes a concept not a term while the second denotes a concept 
which is a term. But in this latter hypothesis, there must be propo- 
sitions concerning one as term, and we shall still have to maintain 
propositions concerning one as adjective as opposed to one as term ; 
yet all such propositions must be false, since a proposition about one 
as adjective makes one the subject, and is therefore really about one 
as term. In short, if there were any adjectives which could not be 
made into substantives without change of meaning, all propositions 
concerning such adjectives (since they would necessarily turn them into 
substantives) would be false, and so would the proposition that all 
such propositions are false, since this itself turns the adjectives into 
substantives. But this state of things is self-contradictory. 

The above argument proves that we were right in saying that terms 
embrace everything that can occur in a proposition, with the possible 
exception of complexes of terms of the kind denoted by any and cognate 
words*. For if A occurs in a proposition, then, in this statement, 
A is the subject ; and we have just seen that, if A is ever not the 
subject, it is exactly and numerically the same A which is not subject 
in one proposition and is subject in another. Thus the theory that 
there are adjectives or attributes or ideal things, or whatever they may 
be called, which are in some way less substantial, less self-subsistent, 
less self-identical, than true substantives, appears to be wholly erroneous, 
and to be easily reduced to a contradiction. Terms which are concepts 
differ from those which are not, not in respect of self-subsistence, but 
in virtue of the fact that, in certain true or false propositions, they 
occur in a manner which is different in an indefinable way from the 
manner in which subjects or terms of relations occur. 

50. Two concepts have, in addition to the numerical diversity 
which belongs to them as terms, another special kind of diversity 
which may be called conceptual. This may be characterized by the 
fact that "two propositions in which the concepts occur otherwise than 
as terms, even if, in all other respects, the two propositions are identical, 

* See the next chapter. 



47 


49 - 62 ] Proper Names, Adjectives, and Verbs 

yet differ in virtue of the fact that the concepts which occur in 
them are conceptually diverse. Conceptual diversity implies numerical 
diversity, but the converse implication does not hold, since not all 
terms are concepts. Numerical diversity, as its name implies, is the 
source of plurality, and conceptual diversity is less important to 
mathematics. But the whole possibility of making different assertions 
about a given term or set of terms depends upon conceptual diversity, 
which is therefore fundamental in general logic. 

61 . It is interesting and not unimportant to examine very briefly 
the connection of the above doctrine of adjectives with certain traditional 
views on the nature of propositions. It is customary to regard all 
propositions as having a subject and a predicate, Le. as having an 
immediate this , and a general concept attached to it by way of description. 
This is, of course, an account of the theory in question which will strike 
its adherents as extremely crude; but it will serve for a general indication 
of the view to be discussed. This doctrine develops by internal logical 
necessity into the theory of Mr Bradley's Logic, that all words stand for 
ideas having what he calls meaning , and that in every judgment there 
is a something, the true subject of the judgment, which is not an idea 
and does not have meaning. To have meaning, it seems to me, is a 
notion confusedly compounded of logical and psychological elements. 
Words all have meaning, in the simple sense that they are symbols 
which stand for something other than themselves. But a proposition, 
unless it happens to be* linguistic, does not itself contain words: it 
contains the entities indicated by words. Thus meaning, in the sense 
in which words have meaning, is irrelevant to logic. But such concepts 
as a man have meaning in another sense : they are, so to speak, symbolic 
in their own logical nature, because they have the property which I call 
denoting . That is to say, when a man occurs in a proposition (e.g. 
“ I met a man in the street ”), the proposition is not about the concept 
a man , but about something quite different, some actual biped denoted 
by the concept. Thus concepts of this kind have meaning in a non- 
psychological sense. And in this sense, when we say “ this is a man,” 
we are making a proposition in which a concept is in some sense 
attached to what is not a concept. But when meaning is thus under- 
stood, the entity indicated by John does not have meaning, as Mr Bradley 
contends* ; and even among concepts, it is only those that denote that 
have meaning. The confusion is largely due, I believe, to the notion 
that words occur in propositions, which in turn is due to the notion that 
propositions are essentially mental and are to be identified with cognitions. 
But these topics of general philosophy must be pursued no further in 
this work. 

62 . It remains to discuss the verb, and to find marks by which 
it is distinguished from the adjective. In regard to verbs also, there, is 

* Logic, Book I, Chap, i, §§ 17, 18 (pp. 58-60). 



48 The Indejinables of Mathematics [chap, iv 

a twofold grammatical form corresponding to a difference in merely 
external relations. There is the verb in the form which it has as verb 
(the various inflexions of this form may be left out of account), and 
there is the verbal noun, indicated by the infinitive or (in English) the 
present participle. The distinction is that between “ Felton killed 
Buckingham 11 and “ Killing no murder.” By analyzing this difference, 
the nature and function of the verb will appear. 

It is plain, to begin with, that the concept which occurs in the verbal 
noun is the very same as that which occurs as verb. This results from 
the previous argument, that every constituent of every proposition must, 
on pain of self-contradiction, lie capable of being made a logical subject. 
If we say “ kills does not mean the same as to kill” we have already 
made kills a subject, and we cannot say that the concept expressed by 
the w r ord kills cannot lie made a subject. Thus the very verb which 
occurs as verb can occur also as subject. The question is : What logical 
difference is expressed by the difference of grammatical form ? And it 
is plain that the difference must lie one in external relations. But 
in regard to verbs, there is a further point. By transforming the verb, 
as it occurs in a proposition, into a verbal noun, the whole proposition 
can be turned into a single logical subject, no longer asserted, and no 
longer containing in itself truth or falsehood. But here too, there seems 
to be no possibility of maintaining that the logical subject which results 
is a different entity from the proposition. “ Caesar died ” and “ the 
death of Caesar” will illustrate this point. If w r e ask : What is asserted 
in the proposition “ Caesar died ” P the answer must be u the death of 
Caesar is asserted.” In that case, it would seem, it is the death of Caesar 
which is true or false ; and yet neither truth nor falsity belongs to 
a mere logical subject. The answer here seems to be that the death of 
Caesar has an external relation to truth or falsehood (as the case may 
be), whereas “ Caesar died ” in some wav or other contains its own truth 
or falsehood as an element. But if this is the correct analysis, it is 
difficult to see how “Caesar died” differs from “the truth of Caesar’s 
death ” in the case where it is true, or M the falsehood of Caesar's death ” 
in the other case. Yet it is quite plain that the latter, at any rate, is 
never equivalent to “Caesar died.” There appears to lx? an ultimate 
notion of assertion, gi\en by the verb, which is lost as soon as we 
substitute a verbal noun, and is lost when the proposition in question 
is made the subject of some other proposition. This does not depend 
upon grammatical form ; for if I say “ Caesar died is a proposition,” 
I do not assert that Caesar did die, and an element which is present in 
“ Caesar died ” has disappeared. Thus the contradiction which was to 
have been avoided, of an entity w hich cannot be made a logical subject, 
appears to have here* become inevitable. This difficulty, which seems to 
biss inherent in the very nature of truth and falsehood, is one with which 
I do not know how to deal satisfactorily. The most obvious course 



49 


52-54] Proper Names, Adjectives , and Verbs 

would be to say that the difference between an asserted and an unasserted 
proposition is not logical, but psychological. In the sense in which 
false propositions may be asserted, this is doubtless true. But there 
is another sense of assertion, very difficult to bring clearly before the 
mind, and yet quite undeniable, in which only true propositions are 
asserted. True and false propositions alike are in some sense entities, 
and are in some sense capable of l>eing logical subjects; but when 
a proposition happens to be true, it has a further quality, over and 
above that which it shares with false propositions, and it is this further 
quality which is what I mean by assertion in a logical as opposed to 
a psychological sense. The nature of truth, however, belongs no more 
to the principles of mathematics than to the principles of everything 
else. I therefore leave this question to the logicians with the above 
brief indication of a difficulty. 

53. It may be asked whether everything that, in the logical sense 
we are concerned with, is a verb, expresses a relation or not. It seems 
plain that, if we were right in holding that “Socrates is human ” is a 
proposition having only one term, the is in this proposition cannot 
express a relation in the ordinary sense. In fact, subject-predicate 
propositions are distinguished by just this non-relational character. 
Nevertheless, a relation between Socrates and humanity is certainly 
implied , and it is very difficult to conceive the proposition as expressing 
no relation at all. We may perhaps say that it is a relation, although 
it is distinguished from other relations in that it does not permit itself 
to be regarded as an assertion concerning either of its terms indifferently, 
but only as an assertion concerning the referent. A similar remark may 
apply to the proposition “ A is,” which holds of every term without 
exception. The is here is quite different from the is in “ Socrates is 
human ” ; it may be regarded as complex, and as really predicating 
Being of A . In this way, the true logical verb in a proposition may be 
always regarded as asserting a relation. But it is so hard to know 
exactly what is meant by relation that the whole question is in danger 
of becoming purely verbal. 

54. The twofold nature of the verb, as actual verb and as verbal 
noun, may be expressed, if all verbs are held to be relations, as the 
difference between a relation in itself and a relation actually relating. 
Consider, for example, the proposition “ A differs from B” The 
constituents of this proposition, if we analyze it, appear to be only A , 
difference, B. Yet these constituents, thus placed side by side, do not 
reconstitute the proposition. The difference which occurs in the 
proposition actually relates A and 5, whereas the difference after 
analysis is a notion which has no connection with A and B. It may 
be said that w r e ought, in the analysis, to mention the relations which 
difference has to A and B, relations which are expressed by is and from 
when we say “A is different from These relations consist in the 



50 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, iv 

fact that A is referent and B relatum with respect to difference. But 
“A, referent, difference, relatum, B” is still merely a list of terms, not 
a proposition. A proposition, in fact, is essentially a unity, and when 
analysis has destroyed the unity, no enumeration of constituents will 
restore the proposition. The verb, when used as a verb, embodies the 
unity of the proposition, and is thus distinguishable from the verb con- 
sidered as a term, though I do not know how to give a clear account of 
the precise nature of the distinction. 

55. It may be doubted whether the general concept difference 
occurs at all in the proposition “ A differs from B? or whether there is 
not rather a specific difference of A and B , and another specific difference 
of C and D, which are respectively affirmed in “A differs from B ” and 
“ C differs from DT In this way, difference becomes a class-concept of 
which there are as many instances as there are pairs of different terms; 
and the instances may be said, in Platonic phrase, to partake of the 
nature of difference. As this point is quite vital in the theory of 
relations, it may be well to dwell upon it. And first of all, I must 
point out that in “ A differs from B” I intend to consider the bare 
numerical difference in virtue of which they are two, not difference in 
this or that respect. 

Let us first try the hypothesis that a difference is a complex notion, 
compounded of difference together with some special quality distinguishing 
a particular difference from every other particular difference. So far as 
the relation of difference itself is concerned, we are to suppose that 
no distinction can be made between different cases ; but there are to be 
different associated qualities in different cases. But since cases are 
distinguished by their terms, the quality must be primarily associated 
with the terms, not with difference. If the quality be not a relation, it 
can have no special connection with the difference of A and B, which it 
was to render distinguishable from bare difference, and if it fails in this 
it becomes irrelevant. On the other hand, if it be a new relation 
between A and B , over and above difference, we shall have to hold that 
any two terms have two relations, difference and a specific difference, the 
latter not holding between any other pair of terms. This view is a 
combination of two others, of which the first holds that the abstract 
general relation of difference itself holds between A and B y while the 
second holds that when two terms differ they have, corresponding to 
this fact, a specific relation of difference, unique and unanalyzable and 
not shared by any other pair of terms. Either of these views may be 
held with either the denial or the affirmation of the other. Let us see 
what is to be said for and against them. 

Against the notion of specific differences, it may be urged that, if 
differences differ, their differences from each other must also differ, and 
thus we are led into an endless process. Those who object to endless 
processes will see in this a proof that differences do not differ. But in 



51 


54, 65] Proper Names , Adjectives, and Verbs 

the present work, it will be maintained that there are no contradictions 
peculiar to the notion of infinity, and that an endless process is not to 
be objected to unless it arises in the analysis of the actual meaning of a 
proposition. In the present case, the process is one of implications, not 
one of analysis ; it must therefore be regarded as harmless. 

Against the notion that the abstract relation of difference holds 
between A and B , we have the argument derived from the analysis of 
“ A differs from B" which gave rise to the present discussion. It is to 
be observed that the hypothesis which combines the general and the 
specific difference must suppose that there are two distinct propositions, 
the one affirming the general, the other the specific difference. Thus if 
there cannot be a general difference between A and Zf, this mediating 
hypothesis is also impossible. And- we saw that the attempt to avoid 
the failure of analysis by including in the meaning of u A differs from 
the relations of difference to A and B was vain. This attempt, in fact, 
leads to an endless process of the inadmissible kind ; for we shall have to 
include the relations of the said relations to A and B and difference, and 
so on, and in this continually increasing complexity we are supposed 
to be only analyzing the meaning of our original proposition. This 
argument establishes a point of very great importance, namely, that 
when a relation holds between two terms, the relations of the relation to 
the terms, and of these relations to the relation and the terms, and so 
on ad infinitum , though all implied by the proposition affirming the 
original relation, fonn no part of the meaning of this proposition. 

But the above argument does not suffice to prove that the relation 
of A to B cannot be alxstract difference : it remains tenable that, as 
was suggested to begin with, the true solution lies in regarding every 
proposition as having a kind of unity which analysis cannot preserve, 
and which is lost even though it be mentioned by analysis as an element 
in the proposition. This view has doubtless its own difficulties, but the 
view that no two pail's of terms can have the same relation both contains 
difficulties of its own and fails to solve the difficulty for the sake of wdiich 
it was invented. For, even if the difference of A and B be absolutely 
peculiar to A and B , still the three terms A , B , difference of A from B , 
do not reconstitute the proposition “ A differs from B? any more than 
A and B and difference did. And it seems plain that, even if differences 
did differ, they would still have to have something in common. But 
the most general way in which two terms can have something in common 
is by both having a given relation to a given term. Hence if no two 
pairs of terms can have the same relation, it follows that no two terms 
can have anything in common, and hence different differences will not 
be in any definable sense instances of difference *. I conclude, then, that 

* The above argument appears to prove that Mr Moore's theory of universale 
with numerically diverse instances in his paper on Identity ( Proceeding « of the 



52 


The Iiidejinables of Mathematics [chap, iv 

the relation affirmed between A and B in the proposition “A differs 
from 2?” is the general relation of difference, and is precisely and 
numerically the same as the relation affirmed between C and D in 
U C differs from D." And this doctrine must be held, for the same 
reasons, to be true of all other relations; relations do not have instances, 
but are strictly the same in all propositions in which they occur. 

We may now sum up the main points elicited in our discussion of 
the verb. The verb, we saw, is a concept which, like the adjective, may 
occur in a proposition without being one of the terms of the proposition, 
though it may also be made into a logical subject. One verb, and one 
only, must occur as verb in every proposition ; but every proposition, 
by turning its verb into a verbal noun, can be changed into a single 
logical subject, of a kind which I shall call in future a propositional 
concept. Every verb, in the logical sense of the word, may be regarded 
as a relation ; when it occurs as verb, it actually relates, but when it 
occurs as verbal noun it is the bare relation considered independently of 
the terms which it relates. Verbs do not, like adjectives, have instances, 
but are identical in all the cases of their occurrence. Owing to the way 
in which the verb actually relates the terms of a proposition, every 
proposition has a unity which renders it distinct from the sum of its 
constituents. All these points lead to logical problems, which, in a 
treatise on logic, would deserve to be fully and thoroughly discussed. 

Having now given a general sketch of the nature of verbs and 
adjectives, I shall proceed, in the next two chapters, to discussions 
arising out of the consideration of adjectives, and in Chapter vii to 
topics connected with verbs. Broadly speaking, classes are connected 
with adjectives, while propositional functions involve verbs. It is for 
this reason that it has been necessary to deal at such length with a 
subject which might seem, at first sight, to be somewhat remote from 
the principles of mathematics. 

Aristotelian Society , 1900— 1!K)1) must not be applied to all concepts. The relation of 
an instance to its universal, at any rate, must be actually and numerically the same 
in all cases where it occurs. 



CHAPTER V. 


DENOTING. 

56. The notion of denoting, like most of the notions of logic, has 
been obscured hitherto by an undue admixture of psychology. There is 
a sense in which we denote, when we point or describe, or employ words 
as symbols for concepts ; this, however, is not the sense that I wish to 
discuss. But the fact that description is possible — that, we are able, by 
the employment of concepts, to designate a thing which is not a concept 
— is due to a logical relation l)etween some concepts and some terms, in 
virtue of which such concepts inherently and logically denote such terms. 
It is this sense of denoting which is here in question. This notion lies 
at the bottom (I think) of all theories of substance, of the subject- 
predicate logic, and of the opposition between things and ideas, 
discursive thought and immediate perception. These various develop- 
ments, in the main, appear to me mistaken, while the fundamental fact 
itself, out of which they have grown, is hardly ever discussed in its 
logical purity. 

A concept denotes when, if it occurs in a proposition, the proposition 
is not aboi/it the concept, hut about a term connected in a certain 
peculiar way with the concept. If I say “ I met a man,” the proposition 
is not about a man : this is a concept which does not walk the streets, 
but lives in the shadowy limbo of the logic-books. What I met was a 
thing, not a concept, an actual man with a tailor and a bank-account or 
a public-house and a drunken wife. Again, the proposition “ any finite 
number is odd or even” is plainly true; yet the roruept “any finite 
number” is neither odd nor even. It is only particular numljers that are 
odd or even; there is not, in addition to these, another entity, any 
number , which is either odd or even, and if there were, it is plain that it 
could not be odd and could not be even. Of the concept “ any number,” 
almost all the propositions that contain the phrase “any number” are 
false. If we wish to speak of the concept, we have to indicate the fact by 
italics or inverted commas. People often assert that man is mortal; 
but what is mortal will die, and yet we should be surprised to find in the 
“Times” such a notice as the following: “Died at his residence of 



54 The Indefinable, s of Mathematics [chap, v 

Camelot, Gladstone Road, Upper Tooting, on the 18th of June 19 — , 
Man, eldest son of Death and Sin.” Man, in fact, does not die ; hence 
if “ man is mortal ” were, as it appears to be, a proposition about man y 
it would be simply false. The fact is, the proposition is about men ; 
and here again, it is not about the concept men , but about what this 
concept denotes. The whole theory of definition, of identity, of classes, 
of symbolism, and of the variable is wrapped up in the theory of 
denoting. The notion is a fundamental notion of logic, and, in spite 
of its difficulties, it is quite essential to be as clear about it as possible. 

57. The notion of denoting may be obtained by a kind of logical 
genesis from subject-predicate propositions, upon which it seems more or 
less dependent. The simplest of propositions are those in which one 
predicate occurs otherwise than as a term, and there is only one term of 
which the predicate in question is asserted. Such propositions may be 
called subject-predicate propositions. Instances are : A is, A is one, 
A is human. Concepts which are predicates might also be called class- 
concepts, because they give rise to classes, but we shall find it necessary 
to distinguish between the words predicate and class -concept. Propositions 
of the subject-predicate type always imply and are implied by other propo- 
sitions of the type which asserts that an individual belongs to a class. 
Thus the above instances are equi valent to : A is an entity, A is a unit, 
A is a man. These new propositions arc not identical with the previous 
ones, since they have an entirely different form. To begin with, is is now 
the only concept not used as a term. A man y we shall find, is neither 
a concept nor a term, but a certain kind of combination of certain terms, 
namely of those which are human. And the relation of Socrates to 
« man is quite different from his relation to humanity ; indeed “Socrates 
is human ” must be held, if the above view r is correct, to be not, in the 
most usual sense, a judgment of relation between Socrates and humanity, 
since this view would make human occur as term in “Socrates is human.” 
It is, of course, undeniable that a relation to humanity is implied by 
“Socrates is human,” namely the relation expressed bv “Socrates has 
humanity”; and this relation conversely implies the subject-predicate 
proposition. But the two propositions can lx* clearly distinguished, and 
it is important to the theory of classes that this should be done. Thus 
we have, in the case of every predicate, three types of propositions 
which imply one another, namely, “Socrates is human,” “Socrates has 
humanity,” and “Socrates is a man.” The first contains a term and 
a predicate, the second two terms and a relation (the second term being 
identical with the predicate of the first proposition)*, while the third 
contains a term, a relation, and w hat I shall call a disjunction (a term 
which will be explained shortly )“f\ The class-concept differs little, if at 

* Cf. § 41). 

t There are two allied propositions expressed by the same words, namely 
“ Socrates is a-man” and “Socrates is-a man.” The above remarks apply to the 



56 - 58 ] Denoting 55 

all, from the predicate, while the class, as opposed to the class-concept, is 
the sum or conjunction of all the terms which have the given predicate. 
The relation which occurs in the second type, (Socrates has humanity) is 
characterized completely by the fact that it implies and is implied by a 
proposition with only one term, in which the other term of the relation 
has become a predicate. A class is a certain combination of terms, a 
class-concept is closely akin to a predicate, and the terms whose com- 
bination forms the class are determined bv the class-concept. Predicates 
are, in a certain sense, the simplest type of concepts, since they occur in 
the simplest type of proposition. 

58. There is, connected with every predicate, a great variety of 
closely allied concepts, which, in so far as they are distinct, it is 
important to distinguish. Starting, for example, with human , we have 
man, men, all men, every man, any man, the human race, of which all 
except the first are twofold, a denoting concept and an object denoted; 
we have also, less closely analogous, the notions 46 a mail” and “some 
man, 1 '’ which again denote objects* other than themselves. This vast 
apparatus connected with every predicate must be borne in mind, and 
an endeavour must be made to give an analysis of all the above notions. 
But for the present, it is the property of denoting, rather than the 
various denoting concepts, that we are concerned with. 

The combination of concepts as such to form new concepts, of greater 
complexity than their constituents, is a subject upon which writers on 
logic have said many things. But flic combination of terms as such, 
to form what by analogy may be called complex terms, is a subject 
upon which logicians, old and new, give us only the scantiest discussion. 
Nevertheless, the subject is of vital importance to the philosophy of 
mathematics, since the nature both of number and of the variable turns 
upon just this point. Six words, of constant occurrence in daily life, 
are also characteristic of mathematics : these are the words ally mr?y, 
any , a, mine and the. For correctness of reasoning, it is essential that 
these words should be sharply distinguished one from another; but 
the subject bristles w r ith difficulties, and is almost wholly neglected by 
logicians +. 

It is plain, to begin with, that a phrase containing one of the above 


former ; but in future, unless the contrary is indicated by a hyphen or otherwise, 
the latter will always he in question. The former expresses the identity of Socrates 
with an ambiguous individual ; the latter expresses a relation of Socrates to the 
class-concept man. 

* I shall use the word object in a wider sense than term , to cover both singular 
and plural, and also cases of ambiguity, such as “a man." The fact that a word can 
be framed with a wider meaning than term raises grave logical problems. Cf. § 47. 

t On the indefinite article, some good remarks are made by Meinong, 
te Abstrahiren und Vergleichen,” Zeitxvhrift fur Pxyvholoyie und Phyxiotoyie der 
Sinnexorgane, Vol. xxiv, p. (>3. 



56 


The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, v 

six words always denotes. It will be convenient, for the present 
discussion, to distinguish a class-concept from a predicate : I shall call 
human a predicate, and man a class-concept, though the distinction is 
perhaps only verbal. The characteristic of a class-concept, as distin- 
guished from terms in general, is that “x is a h” is a propositional 
function when, and only when, u is a class-concept. It must be held that 
when u is not a class-concept, we do not have a false proposition, but 
simply no proposition at all, whatever value we may give to x . This 
enables us to distinguish a class-concept belonging to the null-class, for 
which all propositions of the above form are false, from a term which is 
not a class-concept at all, for which there are no propositions of the 
above form. Also it makes it plain that a class-concept is not a term 
in the proposition “j is a w," for u has a restricted variability if the 
formula is to remain a proposition. A denoting phrase, we may now say, 
consists always of a class-concept preceded by one of the above six words 
or some synonym of one of them. 

59. The question which first meets us in regard to denoting is 
this : Is there one way of denoting six different kinds of objects, or are 
the ways of denoting different P And in the latter case, is the object 
denoted the same in all six cases, or does the object differ as well as the 
way of denoting it? In order to answer this question, it will be first 
necessary to explain the differences between the six, words in question. 
Here it will be convenient to omit the word the to begin with, since this 
word is in a different position from the others, and is liable to limitations 
from which they are exempt. 

In cases where the class defined by a class-concept has only a finite 
number of terms, it is possible to omit the class-concept wholly, and 
indicate the various objects denoted by enumerating the terms and 
connecting them by means of and or or as the case may be. It will 
help to isolate a part of our problem if we first consider this case, 
although the lack of subtlety in language renders it difficult to grasp the 
difference between objects indicated by the same form of words. 

Let us begin by considering two terms only, say Brown and Jones. 
The objects denoted by all, every , any , a and some* are respectively 
involved in the following five propositions. (1) Brown and Jones are 
two of Miss Smith's suitors ; (2) Brown and Jones are paying court to 
Miss Smith ; (3) if it was Brown or Jones you met, it was a very ardent 
lover ; (4) if it was one of Miss Smith's suitors, it must have been 
Brown or Jones; (5) Miss Smith will many Brown or Jones. Although 
only two forms of words, Brazen and Jones and Brazen or Jones , are 
involved in these propositions, 1 maintain that five different combinations 
are involved. The distinctions, some of which are rather subtle, may be 

* I intend to distinguish between a and Home in a way not warranted by language; 
the distinction of all and ewry is also a straining of usage. Both are necessary to 
avoid circumlocution. 



58, 59] Denoting 57 

brought out by the following considerations. In the first proposition, it 
is Brown and Jones who are two, and this is not true of either separately; 
nevertheless it is not the whole composed of Brown and Jones which is 
two, for this is onlv one. The two are a genuine combination of Brown 
with Jones, the kind of combination which, as we shall see in the next 
chapter, is characteristic of classes. In the second proposition, on the 
contrary, w'hat is asserted is true of Brown and Jones severally ; the 
proposition is equivalent to, though not (I think) identical with, “Brown 
is paying court to Miss Smith and Jones is paying court to Miss Smith.'" 
Thus the combination indicated by and is not the same here as in the 
first case: the first case concerned all of them collectively, while the 
second concerns all distribute vely, i.c. each or every one of them. For 
the sake of distinction, we may call the first a numerical conjunction, 
since it gives rise to number, the second a propositional conjunction, 
since the proposition in which it occurs is equivalent to a conjunction of 
propositions. (It should be observed that the conjunction of propo- 
sitions in question is of a wholly different kind from any of the com- 
binations we are considering, being in fact of the kind which is called 
the logical product. The propositions are combined qua propositions, 
not qua terms.) 

The third proposition gives the kind of conjunction by which any is 
defined. There is some difficulty about this notion, which seems half-way 
between a conjunction and a disjunction. This notion may be further 
explained as follows. J^et a and b be two different propositions, 
each of which implies a third proposition r. Then the disjunction 
“a or b " implies c. Now let a and b be propositions assigning the 
same predicate to two different subjects, then there is a combination 
of the two subjects to which the given predicate may be assigned so 
that the resulting proposition is equivalent to the disjunction or 6." 
Thus suppose we have “ if you met Brown, you met a very ardent lover,'" 
and “ if you met Jones, you met a very ardent lover.'" Hence we infer 
“if you met Brown or if you met Jones, you met a very ardent lover," 
and w r e regard this as equivalent to “ if you met Brown or Jones, etc." 
The combination of Brown and Jones here indicated is the same as that 
indicated by cither of them. It differs from a disjunction by the fact 
that it implies and is implied by a statement concerning both ; but in 
some more complicated instances, this mutual implication fails. The 
method of combination is, in fact, different from that indicated by both , 
and is also different from both forms of disjunction. I shall call it the 
variable conjunction. The first form of disjunction is given by (4): this 
is the form which I shall denote by a suitor. Here, although it must 
have been Browm or Jones, it is not true that it must have been Brown, 
nor yet that it must have been Jones. Thus the proposition is not 
equivalent to the disjunction of propositions “ it must have been Brown 
or it must have been Jones." The proposition, in fact, is not capable of 



58 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, v 

statement either as a disjunction or as a conjunction of propositions, 
except in the very roundabout form : “ if it was not Brown, it was 
.Jones, and if it was not Jones, it was Brown,” a form which rapidly 
Ixx'omcs intolerable when the number of terms is increased beyond two, 
and becomes theoretically inadmissible when the number of terms is 
infinite. Thus this form of disjunction denotes a variable term, that 
is, whichever of the two terms we fix upon, it does not denote this term, 
and yet it does denote one or other of them. This form accordingly I 
shall call the variable disjunction. Finally, the second form of disjunction 
is given by (5). This is what I shall call the constant disjunction, since 
here either Brown is denoted, or Jones is denoted, but the alternative 
is undecided. That is to say, our proposition is now equivalent to a 
disjunction of propositions, namely “ Miss Smith will marry Brown, or 
she will marry Jones.” She will marry some one of the two, and the 
disjunction denotes a particular one of them, though it may denote 
either particular one. Thus all the five combinations are distinct. 

It is to be observed that these five combinations yield neither terms 
nor concepts, blit strictly and only combinations of terms. The first 
yields many terms, while the others yield something absolutely peculiar, 
which is neither one nor many. The combinations are combinations of 
terms, effected without the use of relations. Corresponding to each 
combination there is, at least if the terms combined form a class, a 
perfectly definite concept, which denotes the various terms of the combi- 
nation combined in the specified manner. To explain this, let us repeat 
our distinctions in a case where the terms to be combined are not 
enumerated, as above, but are defined as the terms of a certain class. 

60. When a class-concept a is given, it must be held that the 
various terms belonging to the class are also given. That is to sav, any 
term being proposed, it can be decided whether or not it belongs to the 
class. In this way, a collection of terms can be given otherwise than by 
enumeration. Whether a collection can be given otherwise than by 
enumeration or bv a class-concept, is a question which, for the present, 
I leave undetermined. But the possibility of giving a collection by a 
class-concept is highly important, since it enables us to deal with infinite 
collections, as we shall see in Part V. For the present, I wish to examine 
the meaning of such phrases as all a\ every a, any a, an a, and some a. 
All a s, to begin with, denotes a numerical conjunction ; it is definite as 
soon as a is given. The concept all a\s is a perfectly definite single 
concept, which denotes the terms of a taken all together. The terms 
so taken have a number, which may thus be regarded, if we choose, as 
a property of the class-concept, since it is determinate for any given 
class -concept. Every a, on the contrary, though it still denotes all the 
a\ denotes them in a different way, i.e. severally instead of collectively. 
Any a denotes only one «, but it is wholly irrelevant which it denotes, 
and what is said wdll be equally true whichever it may be. Moreover, 



69 - 61 ] Denoting 59 

any a denotes a variable a, that is, whatever particular a we may fasten 
upon, it is certain that any a does not denote that one ; and yet of that 
one any proposition is true which is true of any a. An a denotes a 
variable disjunction : that is to sav, a proposition which holds of an a ; 
may be false concerning each particular a, so that it is not reducible to 
a disjunction of propositions. For example, a point lies between any 
point and any other point ; but it would not be true of any one 
particular point that it. lav between anv point and any other point, 
since there would be many pairs of points between which it did not lie. 
This brings us finally to some a, the constant disjunction. This denotes 
just one term of the class a, but the term it, denotes may be any term 
of the class. Thus u some moment does not follow anv moment T> would 
mean that there was a first moment in time, while “n moment precedes 
any moment r means the exact opposite, namelv, that everv moment has 
predecessors. 

61. In the case of a class a which has a finite number of terms — 
say a 19 a 2 , . . a„, we can illustrate these various notions as follows: 

(1) All a\ denotes a } and a, and ... and 

(2) Every a denotes a , and denotes a., and ... and denotes a n . 

(3) Any a denotes a x or or ... or a u> where or has the meaning 
that it is irrelevant which we take. 

(4) An a denotes a x or a., or... or a ny when* or has the meaning 
that no one in particular must be taken, just as in all a\ we must not 
take any one in particular. 

(5) Some a denotes a, or denotes « a or ... or denotes a, n where it is 
not irrelevant which is taken, but on the contrary some one particular a 
must be taken. 

As the nature and properties of the various ways of combining terms 
are of vital importance to the principles of mathematics, it may be well 
to illustrate their properties bv the following important examples. 

(a) Let a be a class, and ft a class of classes. We then obtain 
in all six possible relations of a to b from various combinations of «//?/, 
a and .some. All and every do not, in this ease, introduce anything new. 
The six cases are as follows. 

(1) Any a belongs to any class Ixdonging to ft, in other words, the 
class a is wholly contained in the common part or logical product of 
the various classes belonging to ft. 

(2) Any a belongs to a ft, i.e. the class a is contained in any 
class which contains all the li s, or, is contained in the logical sum of 
all the Ijs. 

(3) Any a belongs to some ft, i.e . there is a class belonging to ft, 
in which the class a is contained. The difference between this case and 
the second arises from the fact that here there is one ft to which every 
a belongs, whereas before it was only decided that every a belonged to 
a ft, and different as might belong to different ft's. 



60 


The Indcfinables of Mathematics [ chap , v 

(4) An a belongs to any b, i.e. whatever b we take, it has a part 
in common with a. 

(5) An a belongs to a 6, i.e. there is a ft which has a part in common 
with a. This is equivalent to 44 some (or an) a belongs to some ft 7 s 

(6) Some a belongs to any ft, i.e . there is an a which belongs to 
the common part of all the ft’s, or a and all the ft's have a common part. 
These are all the cases that arise here. 

08) It is instructive, as showing the generality of the type of 
relations here considered, to con) pare the above case with the following. 
Let «, ft be two series of real numbers ; then six precisely analogous 
cases arise. 

(1) Any a is less than any ft, or, the series a is contained among 
numbers less than every ft. 

(2) Any a is less than a ft, or, whatever a we take, there is a ft 
which is greater, or, the series a is contained among numbers less than 
a (variable) term of the series ft. It does not follow that some term of 
the series ft is greater than all the a s. 

(3) Any e i is less than some ft, or, there is a term of ft which is 
greater than all the (is. This case is not to be confounded with (JS). 

(4) An a is less than any ft, i.e. whatever ft we take, there is an 
a which is less than it. 

(5) An a is less than a ft, i.e. it is possible to find an a and a 6 
such that the a is less than the ft. This merely denies that any a is 
greater than any ft. 

((i) Some a is less than any ft, i.e. there is an a which is less than 
all the ft's. This was not implied in (4), where the a was variable, 
whereas here it is constant. 

In this case, actual mathematics have compelled the distinction 
between the variable and the constant disjunction. But in other cases, 
where mathematics have not obtained sway, the distinction has been 
neglected ; and the mathematicians, as was natural, have not investi- 
gated the logical nature of the disjunctive notions which they employed. 

(7) I shall give one other instance, as it brings in the difference 
between any and every , which has not been relevant in the previous 
cases. Let a and ft be two classes of classes; then twenty different 
relations between them arise from different combinations of the terms 
of their terms. The following technical terms will be useful. If a be 
a class of classes, its logical sum consists of all terms belonging to any 
a, i.e . all terms such that there is an a to which they belong, while 
its logical product consists of all terms belonging to every a, i.e. to the 
common part of all the (is. We have then the following cases. 

(1) Any term of any a belongs to every ft, i.e. the logical sum of 
a is contained in the logical product of b. 

(2) Any term of any a belongs to a ft, i.e. the logical sum of a 
is contained in the logical sum of ft. 



61 , 62 ] Denoting 61 

(3) Any term of any a belongs to some ft, i.e. there is a ft which 
contains the logical sum of a. 

(4) Any term of some (or an) a belongs to every ft, i.e. there is an 
a which is contained in the product of ft. 

(5) Any term of some (or an) a belongs to a ft, i.e. there is an a 
which is contained in the sum of ft. 

(6) Any term of some (or an) a belongs to some ft, i.e. there is a 
ft which contains one class belonging to a. 

(7) A term of any a belongs to any ft, i.e. any class of a and any 
class of 6 have a common part. 

(8) A term of any a belongs to a ft, i.e. any class of a has a part 
in common with the logical sum of ft. 

(9) A term of any a belongs to some ft, i.e. there is a ft with which 
any a has a part in common. 

(10) A term of an a belongs to every ft, i.e. the logical sum of a 
and the logical product of ft have a common part. 

(11) A term of an a belongs to any ft, i.e . given any ft, an a can 
be found with which it has a common part. 

(12) A term of an a belongs to a ft, i.e. the logical sums of a and 
of ft have a common part. 

(13) Any term of every a belongs to every ft, i.e. the logical 
product of a is contained in the logical product of ft. 

(14) Any term of every a belongs to a ft, i.e. the logical product 
of a is contained in the logical sum of ft. 

(15) Any term of every a belongs to some ft, i.e. there is a term 
of ft in which the logical product of a is contained. 

(16) A (or some) term of every a belongs to every ft, i.e. the logical 
products of a and of ft have a common part. 

(17) A (or some) term of every a belongs to a ft, i.e. the logical 
product of a and the logical sum of ft have a common part. 

(18) Some term of any a belongs to every ft, i.e. any a has a part 
in common with the logical product of ft. 

(19) A term of some a belongs to any ft, i.e. there is some term 
of a with which any ft has a common part. 

(20) A term of every a belongs to any ft, i.e. any ft has a part in 
common with the logical product of a. 

The above examples show that, although it may often happen that 
there is a mutual implication (which has not always been stated) of 
corresponding propositions concerning some and a, or concerning any 
and every , yet in other cases there is no such mutual implication. Thus 
the five notions discussed in the present chapter are genuinely distinct, 
and to confound them may lead to perfectly definite fallacies. 

62 . It appears from the above discussion that, whether there are 
different ways of denoting or not, the objects denoted by all men , every 
man y etc. are certainly distinct. It seems therefore legitimate to say 



02 The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, v 

that the whole difference lies in the objects, and that denoting itself is 
the same in all cases. There are, however, many difficult problems 
connected with the subject, especially as regards the nature of the 
objects denoted. All men , which I shall identify with the class of men, 
seems to be an unambiguous object, although grammatically it is plural. 
But in the other cases the question is not so simple : we may doubt 
whether an ambiguous object is unambiguously denoted, or a definite 
object ambiguously denoted. Consider again the proposition “ I met 
a man. 1 ’ It, is quite certain, and is implied by this proposition, that 
what I met was an unambiguous perfectly definite man : in the technical 
language which is lie re adopted, the proposition is expressed by “ I met 
some man.” But the actual man whom I met forms no part of the 
proposition in question, and is not specially denoted by some man . 
Thus the concrete event which happened is not asserted in the proposi- 
tion. What is asserted is merely that some one of a class of concrete 
events took place. The whole human race is involved in my assertion : 
if any man who ever existed or w r ill exist had not existed or been going 
to exist, the purport of my proposition would have been different. Or, 
to put the same point in more intensional language, if I substitute for 
man any of the other class-concepts applicable to the individual whom 
I had the honour to meet, my proposition is changed, although the 
individual in question is just as much denoted as before. What this 
proves is, that some man must not be regarded as actually denoting 
Smith and actually denoting Brown, and so on : the whole procession 
of human beings throughout the ages is always relevant to every pro- 
position in which some man occurs, and what is denoted is essentially 
not each separate man, but a kind of combination of all men. This 
is more evident in the case of every , any , and a. There is, then, a 
definite something, different in each of the five cases, which must, in 
a sense, be an object, but is characterized as a set of terms combined 
in a certain way, which something is denoted by all men , every man , 
any man , a man or some man ; and it is with this very paradoxical 
object that propositions are concerned in which the corresponding 
concept is used as denoting. 

63. It remains to discuss the notion of the. This notion has 
been symbolically emphasized by Beano, with very great advantage to 
his calculus; but here it is to be discussed philosophically. The use 
of identity and the theory of definition are dependent upon this notion, 
which has thus the very highest philosophical importance. 

The word the, in the singular, is correctly employed only in relation 
to a class-concept of which there is only one instance. We speak of 
the King, the Prime Minister, and so on (understanding at the present 
time ) ; and in such cases there is a method of denoting one single definite 
term by means of a concept, which is not given us by any of our other five 
words. It is owing to this notion that mathematics can give definitions 



62 - 64 ] Denoting 63 

of terms which are not concepts — a possibility which illustrates the 
difference between mathematical and philosophical definition. Every 
term is the only instance of .some class-concept, and thus every term, 
theoretically, is capable of definition, provided we have not adopted 
a system in which the said term is one of our indefinables. It is a 
curious paradox, puzzling to the symbolic mind, that definitions, theo- 
retically, are nothing but statements of symbolic abbreviations, irrelevant 
to the reasoning and inserted only for practical convenience, while yet, 
in the development of a subject, they always require a very large amount 
of thought, and often embody some of the greatest achievements of 
analysis. This fact seems to be explained by the theory of denoting. 
An object may be present to the mind, without our knowing any concept 
of which the said object is the instance; and the discovery of such a 
concept is not a mere improvement in notation. The reason why this 
appears to be the case is that, as soon as the definition is found, it 
becomes wholly unnecessary to the reasoning to remember the actual 
object defined, since only concepts are relevant to our deductions. In 
the moment of discovery, the definition is seen to be true , because the 
object to be defined was already in our thoughts ; but as part of our 
reasoning it is not true, but merely symbolic, since what the reasoning 
requires is not that it should deal with that object, but merely that 
it should deal with the object denoted by the definition. 

In most actual definitions of mathematics, what is defined is a dasu 
of entities, and the notion of the does not then explicitly appear. But 
even in this case, what is really defined is the class satisfying certain 
conditions ; for a class, as we shall see in the next chapter, is always 
a term or conjunction of terms and never a concept. Thus the notion of 
the is always relevant in definitions ; and we may observe generally that 
the adequacy of concepts to deal with things is wholly dependent upon 
the unambiguous denoting of a single term which this notion gives. 

64 . The connection of denoting with the nature of identity is 
important, and helps, I think, to solve some rather serious problems. 
The question whether identity is or is not a relation, and even whether 
there is such a concept at all, is not easy to answer. For, it may be 
said, identity cannot be a relation, since, where it is truly asserted, 
we have only one term, whereas two terms are required for a relation. 
And indeed identity, an objector may urge, cannot be anything at all : 
two terms plainly are not identical, and one term cannot be, for what 
is it identical with ? Nevertheless identity must be something. We 
might attempt to remove identity from terms to relations, and say that 
two terms are identical in some respect when they have a given relation 
to a given term. But then we shall have to hold either that there is 
strict identity between the two cases of the given relation, or that the 
two cases have identity in the sense of having a given relation to a given 
term ; but the latter view leads to an endless process of the illegitimate 



64 


The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, v 

kind. Thus identity must be admitted, and the difficulty as to the 
two terms of a relation must be met by a sheer denial that two different 
terms are necessary. There must always be a referent and a relatum, 
but these need not be distinct ; and where identity is affirmed, they are 
not so*. 

But the question arises : Why is it ever worth w’hile to affirm 
identity? This question is answered by the theory of denoting. If 
we say “ Edward VII is the King,’ 1 we assert an identity ; the reason 
why this assertion is worth making is, that in the one case the actual 
term occurs, while in the other a denoting concept takes its place. 
(For purposes of discussion, I ignore the fact that Edwards form a 
class, and that seventh Edwards form a class having only one term. 
Edward VII is practically, though not formally, a proper name.) Often 
two denoting concepts occur, and the term itself is not mentioned, as 
in the proposition “ the present Pope is the last survivor of his genera- 
tion." When a term is given, the assertion of its identity with itself, 
though true, is perfectly futile, and is never made outside the logic- 
books; but where denoting concepts are introduced, identity is at once 
seen to be significant. In this case, of course, there is involved, though 
not asserted, a relation of the denoting concept to the term, or of the 
two denoting concepts to each other. But the is which occurs in such 
propositions does not itself state this further relation, but states pure 
identity f. 

65. To sum up. When a class-concept, preceded by one of the 
six words all , every , any , a , some , the, occurs in a proposition, the 
proposition is, as a rule, not about the concept formed of the two words 
together, but about an object quite different from this, in general not 
a concept at all, but a term or complex of terms. This may be seen by 
the fact that propositions in which such concepts occur are in general 
false concerning the concepts themselves. At the same time, it is 
possible to consider and make propositions about the concepts them- 
selves, but these are not the natural propositions to make in employing 
the concepts. “ Any number is odd or even " is a perfectly natural propo- 
sition, whereas “ Any number is a variable conjunction" is a proposition 
only to be made in a logical discussion. In such cases, we say that the 
concept in question denotes . We decided that denoting is a perfectly 

* On relations of terms to themselves, v. inf. Chap, ix, § 95. 

t The word t> is terribly ambiguous, and great care is necessary in order not to 
confound its various meanings. We have (1) the sense in which it asserts Being, as 
in “A is”; (2) the sense of identity; (3) the sense of predication, in “A is human”; 
(4) the sense of “A is a-man ” (cf. p. 54, note), which is very like identity. In 
addition to these there are less common uses, as u to be good is to be happy,” where 
a relation of assertions is meant, that relation, in fact, which, where it exists, gives 
rise to formal implication. Doubtless there are further meanings which have not 
occurred to me. On the meanings of is, cf. De Morgan, Formal Logie , pp. 49, 50. 



64 , 66 ] Denoting 65 

definite relation, the same in all six cases, and that it is the nature of 
the denoted object and the denoting concept which distinguishes the 
cases. We discussed at some length the nature and the differences of 
the denoted objects in the five cases in which these objects are com- 
binations of terms. In a full discussion, it would Ik* necessary also to 
discuss the denoting concepts : the actual meanings of these concepts, as 
opposed to the nature of the objects they denote, have not l>een discussed 
above. But I do not know that there would Ik* anything further to say 
on this topic. Finally, we discussed tfu 1 , and showed that this notion 
is essential to what mathematics calls definition, as well as to the 
possibility of uniquely determining a term by means of concepts; the 
actual use of identity, though not its meaning, was also found to depend 
upon this way of denoting a single term. From this point we can 
advance to the discussion of classes, thereby continuing the development 
of the topics connected with adjectives. 



CHAPTER VI. 


CLASSES. 

66. To bring clearly before the mind what is meant by elm, and 
to distinguish this notion from all the notions to which it is allied, is 
one of the most difficult and important problems of mathematical 
philosophy. Apart from the fact that clans is a very fundamental 
concept, the utmost care and nicety is required in this subject on 
account of the contradiction to be discussed in Chapter x. I must 
ask the reader, therefore, not to regard as idle pedantry the apparatus 
of somewhat subtle discriminations to be found in what follows. 

It has been customary, in works on logic, to distinguish two stand- 
points, that of extension and that of intension. Philosophers have 
usually regarded the latter as more fundamental, while Mathematics 
has been held to deal specially with the former. M. Couturat, in his 
admirable work on Leibniz, states roundly that Symbolic Logic can only 
be built up from the standpoint of extension* ; and if there really were 
only these two points of view, his statement would be justified. But as 
a matter of fact, there are positions intermediate between pure intension 
and pure extension, and it is in these intermediate regions that Symbolic 
Logic has its lair. It is essential that the classes with which we are 
concerned should be composed of terms, and should not be predicates or 
concepts, for a class must be definite when its terms are given, but 
in general there will be many predicates which attach to the given 
terms and to no others. We cannot of course attempt an intensional 
definition of a class as the class of predicates attaching to the terms 
in question and to no others, for this would involve a vicious circle; 
hence the point of view of extension is to some extent unavoidable. 
On the other hand, if we take extension pure, our class is defined by 
enumeration of its terms, and this method will not allow us to deal, as 
Symbolic Logic does, with infinite classes. Thus our classes must in 
general be regarded as objects denoted by concepts, and to this extent 
the point of view of intension is essential. It is owing to this con- 


* La Logique de Leibniz, Paris, 1901, p. 387. 



Classes 


or 


66 - 68 ] 

sideration that the theory of denoting is of such great importance. In 
the present chapter we have to specify the precise degree in which 
extension and intension respectively enter into the definition and em- 
ployment of classes; and throughout the discussion, I must ask the 
reader to remember that whatever is said has to l>e applicable to infinite 
as well as to finite classes. 

67. When an object is unambiguously denoted by a concept, I shall 
speak of the concept as a concept (or sometimes, loosely, as the concept) 
of the object in question. Thus it will be necessary to distinguish the 
concept of a class from a class -concept. We agreed to call man a class- 
concept, but man does not, in its usual employment, denote anything. 
On the other hand, men and all men (which I shall regard as synonyms) do 
denote, and I shall contend that what they denote is the class composed 
of all men. Thus man is the class-concept, men (the concept) is the 
concept of the class, and men (the object denoted by the concept men) 
are the (hiss. It is no doubt confusing, at first, to use class-concept and 
concept of a class in different senses ; but so many distinctions ate 
required that some straining of language seems unavoidable. In 
the phraseology of the preceding chapter, we may sa y that a class is a 
numerical conjunction of terms. This is the thesis which is to lie 
established. 

68. In Chapter n we regarded classes as derived from assertions, 
i.e, as all the entities satisfying some assertion, whose form was left 
wholly vague. I shall discuss this view critically in the next chapter ; 
for the present, we may confine ourselves to classes as they are derived 
from predicates, leaving open the question whether every assertion is 
equivalent to a predication. We may, then, imagine a kind of genesis 
of classes, through the successive stages indicated by the typical propo- 
sitions 44 Socrates is human,” 44 Socrates has humanity ,” 44 Socrates is a 
man,” 44 Socrates is one among men.” Of these propositions, the last 
only, we should say, explicitly contains the class as a constituent ; but 
every subject-predicate proposition gives rise to the other three equi valent 
propositions, and thus every predicate (provided it can lx? sometimes 
truly predicated) gives rise to a class. This is the genesis of classes from 
the intensional standpoint. 

On the other hand, when mathematicians deal with what they call a 
manifold, aggregate, Mcnge> ensemble , or some equivalent name, it is 
common, especially where the number of terms involved is finite, to regard 
the object in question (which is in fact a class) as defined by the enumera- 
tion of its terms, and as consisting possibly of a single term, which in 
that case is the class. Here it is not predicates and denoting that are 
relevant, but terms connected by the word and , in the sense in which 
this word stands for a numerical conjunction. Thus Brown and Jones 
are a class, and Brown singly is a class. This is the extensional genesis 
of classes. 



68 


The Indefinable# of Mathematics [chap, vi 

69. The best formal treatment of classes in existence is .that of 
Peano*. But in this treatment a number of distinctions of great 
philosophical importance are overlooked. Peano, not I think quite 
consciously, identifies the class with the class-concept ; thus the relation 
of an individual to its class is, for him, expressed by is a. For him, 
“2 is a number” is a proposition in which a term is said to belong to 
the class number. Nevertheless, he identifies the equality of classes, 
which consists in their having the same terms, with identity — a pro- 
ceeding which is quite illegitimate when the class is regarded as the 
class-concept. In order to perceive that man and featherless biped are 
not identical, it is quite unnecessary to take a hen and deprive the poor 
bird of its feathers. Or, to take a less complex instance, it is plain that 
even prime is not identical with integer next after 1. Thus when we 
identify the class with the class-concept, we must admit that two classes 
may be equal without being identical. Nevertheless, it is plain that 
when two class-concepts are equal, some identity is involved, for we say 
that they have the same terms. Thus there is some object which is 
positively identical when two class-concepts are equal ; and this object, 
it would seem, is more properly called the class. Neglecting the plucked 
hen, the class of featherless bipeds, every one would say, is the same as 
the class of men ; the class of even primes is the same as the class of 
integers next after 1. Thus we must not identify the class with the 
class-concept, or regard “ Socrates is a man ” as expressing the relation 
of an individual to a class of which it is a member. This has two 
consequences (to be established presently) which prevent the philosophical 
acceptance of certain points in Peano’s formalism. The first consequence 
is, that there is no such thing as the null-class, though there are null 
class-concepts. The second is, that a class having only one term is to 
be identified, contrary to Peano’s usage, with that one term. I should 
not propose, however, to alter his practice or his notation in consequence 
of either of these points ; rather I should regard them as proofs that 
Symbolic Logic ought to concern itself, as far as notation goes, with 
class-concepts rather than with classes. 

70. A class, we have seen, is neither a predicate nor a class- 
concept, for different predicates and different class-concepts may corre- 
spond to the same class. A class also, in one sense at least, is distinct 
from the whole composed of its terms, for the latter is only and essentially 
one, while the former, where it has many terms, is, as we shall see later, 
the very kind of object of which many is to be asserted. The distinction 
of a class as many from a class as a whole is often made by language : 
space and points, time and instants, the army and the soldiers, the navy 
and the sailors, the Cabinet and the Cabinet Ministers, all illustrate the 
distinction. The notion of a w hole, in the sense of a pure aggregate 


* Neglecting- Frege, who is discussed in the Appendix. 



Classes 


69 


69-71] 

which is here relevant, is, we shall find, not always applicable where the 
notion of the class as many applies (see Chapter x). In such cases, 
though terms may be said to belong to the class, the class must not be 
treated as itself a single logical subject*. But this case never arises 
where a class can be generated by a predicate. Thus we may for the 
present dismiss this complication from our minds. In a class as many, 
the component terms, though they have some kind of unity, have less 
than is required for a whole. They have, in fact, just, so much unity 
as is required to make them many, and not enough to prevent them from 
remaining many. A further reason for distinguishing wholes from 
classes as many is that a class as one may be one of the terms of itself 
as many, as in “classes are one among classes'*'’ (the extensional equi- 
valent of “ class is a class-concept ,1 ), whereas a complex whole can never 
be one of its own constituents. 

71. Class may be defined either extensionally or intensionally. 
That is to say, w r e may define the kind of object which is a class, or the 
kind of concept which denotes a class : this is the precise meaning of 
the opposition of extension and intension in this connection. But 
although the general notion can be defined in this two-fold manner, 
particular classes, except when they happen to be finite, can only be 
defined intensionally, i.c. as the objects denoted by such and such con- 
cepts. I believe this distinction to Ixi purely psychological : logically, 
the extensional definition appears to be equally applicable to infinite 
classes, but practically, if we were to attempt it, Death would cut short 
our laudable endeavour before it had attained its goal. Logically, 
therefore, extension and intension seem to be on a par. I will begin 
with the extensional view. 

When a class is regarded as defined by the enumeration of its terms, 
it is more naturally called a collection. I shall for the moment adopt 
this name, as it will not prejudge the question whether the objects 
denoted by it are truly classes or not. By a collection I mean what is 
conveyed by “ A and B v * or “ A and B and C" or any other enumeration 
of definite terms. The collection is defined by the actual mention of 
the terms, and the terms are connected by and . It would seem that 
and represents a fundamental way of combining terms, and that just 
this way of combination is essential if anything is to result of which a 
number other than 1 can be asserted. Collections do not presuppose 
numbers, since they result simply from the terms together with and : 
they could only presuppose numbers in the particular case where the 
terms of the collection themselves presupposed numbers. There is a 
grammatical difficulty which, since no method exists of avoiding it, 
must be pointed out and allowed for. A collection, grammatically, is 

* A plurality of terms is not the logical subject when a number is asserted of it : 
such propositions have not one subject, but many subjects. See end of § 74. 



70 The Indefinable, s of Mathematics [chap. VI 

singular, whereas A and B, A and B and C, etc. are essentially plural. 
This grammatical difficulty arises from the logical fact (to be discussed 
presently) that whatever is many in general forms a whole which is 
one; it is, therefore, not removable by a better choice of technical 
terms. 

r Fhe notion of and was brought into prominence by Bolzano*. In 
order to understand what infinity is, he says, 44 we must go back to one 
of the simplest conceptions of our understanding, in order to reach an 
agreement concerning the word that we are to use to denote it. This is 
the conception which underlies the conjunction and , which, however, if 
it is to stand out as clearly as is required, in many cases, both by the 
purposes of mathematics and by those of philosophy, I believe to be best 
expressed by the words : 4 A system (. Inbcgriff ) of certain things," or 
‘a whole consisting of certain parts." But we must add that every 
arbitrary object A can be combined in a system with any others 
B, C, or (speaking still more correctly) already forms a system 

by itself f, of which some more or less important truth can be enunciated, 
provided only that each of the presentations A , B , C, IJ,... in fact 
represents a different object, or in so far as none of the propositions 
4 A is the same as Bf 4 A is the same as C," 4 A is the same as Df etc., 
is true. For if c.g. A is the same as B, then it is certainly unreasonable 
to speak of a system of the things A and B 

The above passage, good as it is, neglects several distinctions which 
we have found necessary. First and foremost, it does not distinguish 
the many from the whole which they form. Secondly, it does not appear 
to observe that the method of enumeration is not practically applicable 
to infinite systems. Thirdly, and this is connected with the second point, 
it does not make any mention of intensional definition nor of the notion 
of a class. What we have to consider is the difference, if any, of a class 
from a collection on the one hand, and from the whole formed of the 
collection on the other. But let us first examine further the notion 
of and. 

Anything of which a finite number other than 0 or 1 can be asserted 
would be commonly said to lx* many, and many, it might be said, are 

always of the form 44 A and B and C and Here A , B , C, ... are 

each one and are all different. To say that A is one seems to amount 
to much the same as to say that A is not of the form 44 A x and A» and 

A s and "" To sav that A, B, C\ ... are all different seems to amount 

only to a condition as regards the symbols : it should lx held that 
44 A and A "" is meaningless, so that diversity is implied by and, and need 
not be specially stated. 

A term A which is one may be regarded as a particular case of a 

* Ptirudoxien den Unendlivhen , Leipzig, 18.54 (2nd ed., Berlin, 1880), § 3. 

t i.e. the combination of A with B , (\ 1), ... already forms a system. 



Classes 


71 


71] 

collection, namely as a collection of one term. Thus every collection 
which is many presupposes many collections which are each one : A and 
B presupposes A and presupposes B. Conversely some collections of 
one term presuppose many, namely those which are complex : thus 
“ A differs from B ” is one, but presupposes A and difference and B . 
But there is not symmetry in this respect, for the ultimate presupposi- 
tions of anything are always simple terms. 

Every pair of terms, without exception, can be combined in the 
manner indicated by A and B , and if neither A nor B be many, then 
A and B are two. A and B may be any conceivable entities, any 
possible objects of thought, they may be* points or numbers or true or 
false propositions or events or people, in short anything that can be 
counted. A teaspoon and the number 3, or a chimaera and a four- 
dimensional space, are certainly two. Thus no restriction whatever is 
to be placed on A and B , except that neither is to be many. It should 
be observed that A and B need not exist, but must, like anything that 
can be mentioned, have Being. The distinction of Being and existence 
is important, and is well illustrated by the process of counting. What 
can be counted must be something, and must certainly be, though it 
need by no means be possessed of the further privilege of existence. 
Thus what we demand of the terms of our collection is merely tliat each 
should be an entity. 

The question may now be asked : What is meant by A and B ? 
Does this mean anything more than the juxtaposition of A with B? 
That is, does it contain any element over and above that of A and that 
of B ? Is and a separate concept, which occurs besides A , B P To 
either answer there are objections. In the first place, and, we might 
suppose, cannot be a new concept, for if it were, it would have to be 
some kind of relation between A and B ; A and B would then be a 
proposition, or at least a propositional concept, and would Ik* one, not 
two. Moreover, if there are two concepts, there are two, and no third 
mediating concept seems necessary to make them two. Thus and would 
seem meaningless. But it is difficult to maintain this theory. To begin 
with, it seems rash to hold that any word is meaningless. When we use 
the word and , we do not seem to be uttering mere idle breath, but some 
idea seems to correspond to the word. Again some kind of combination 
seems to be implied by the fact that A and B are two, which is not true 
of either separately. When we say U A and B art* yellow,” we can replace 
the proposition by 44 A is yellow ” and 44 B is yellow ” ; but this cannot 
be done for 44 A and B are two ” ; on the contrary, A is one and B is one . 
Thus it seems best to regard and as expressing a definite unique kind of 
combination, not a relation, and not combining A and B into a whole, 
which would be one. This unique kind of combination will in future be 
called addition of mdhndtuds. It is important to observe that it applies 
to terms, and only applies to numbers in consequence of their being 



72 The Indejinables of Mathematics [chap, vi 

terms. Thus for the present, 1 and 2 are two, and 1 and 1 is 
meaningless. 

As regards what is meant by the combination indicated by and, it is 
indistinguishable from what we before called a numerical conjunction. 
That is, A and B is what is denoted by the concept of a class of which 
A and B are the only members. If u be a class-concept of which the 
propositions “ A is at#'" “ B is a u 11 are true, but of which all other 
propositions of the same form are false, then “ all ids *" is the concept of 
a class whose only terms are A and B ; this concept denotes the terms 
A , B combined in a certain way, and “ A and B " are those terms com- 
bined in just that way. Thus “ A and B n are the class, but are distinct 
from the class-concept and from the concept of the class. 

The notion of and, however, does not enter into the meaning of a 
class, for a single term is a class, although it is not a numerical 
conjunction. If v l)e a class -concept, and only one proposition of the 
form u & is a n 11 be true, then “ all ids ” is a concept denoting a single 
term, and this term is the class of which “ all tdi s " is a concept. Thus 
what seems essential to a class is not the notion of and, but the being 
denoted by some concept of a class. This brings us to the intensional 
view of classes. 

72. We agreed in the preceding chapter that there are not 
different ways of denoting, but only different kinds of denoting concepts 
and correspondingly different kinds of denoted objects. We have 
discussed the kind of denoted object which constitutes a class ; we have 
now to consider the kind of denoting concept. 

The consideration of classes which results from denoting concepts 
is more general than the extensional consideration, and that in two 
respects. In the first place it allows, what the other practically 
excludes, the admission of infinite classes ; in the second place it 
introduces the null concept of a class. Hut, before discussing these 
matters, there is a purely logical point of some importance to be 
examined. 

If u be a class-concept, is the concept “ all it s r * analyzable into two 
constituents, all and u, or is it a new concept, defined by a certain 
relation to u, and no more complex than u itself? We may observe, 
to begin with, that “ all a s ” is synonymous with u u\" at least according 
to a very common use of the plural. Our question is, then, as to the 
meaning of the plural. The word all has certainly some definite 
meaning, but it seems highly doubtful whether it means more than 
the indication of a relation. “ All men ” and “ all numbers ” have in 
common the fact that they both have a certain relation to a class- 
concept, namely to man and number respectively. But it is very difficult 
to isolate any further element of att-ness which both share, unless we 
take as this element the mere fact that both are concepts of classes. 
It would seem, then, that u all ids is not validly analyzable into all 



Classes 


71 - 73 ] 


73 


and u 9 and that language, in this case as in some others, is a misleading 
guide. The same remark will apply to every , any , some, a, and the . 

It might perhaps be thought that a class ought to be considered, 
not merely as a numerical conjunction of terms, but as a numerical 
conjunction denoted by the concept of a class. This complication, 
however, would serve no useful purpose, except to preserve Peano’s 
distinction between a single term and the class whose only term it is — 
a distinction which is easy to grasp when the class is identified with the 
class-concept, but which is inadmissible in our view of classes. It is 
evident that a numerical conjunction considered as denoted is either 
the same entity as when not so considered, or else is a complex of 
denoting together with the object denoted ; and the object denoted is 
plainly what we mean by a class. 

With regard to infinite classes, say the class of numbers, it is to be 
observed that the concept all numbers , though not itself infinitely 
complex, yet denotes an infinitely complex object. This is the inmost 
secret of our power to deal with infinity. An infinitely complex 
concept, though there may be such, can certainly not be manipulated 
by the human intelligence ; but infinite collections, owing to the notion 
of denoting, can be manipulated without introducing any concepts of 
infinite complexity. Throughout the discussions of infinity in later 
Parts of the present work, this remark should be borne in mind: if 
it is forgotten, there is an air of magic which causes the results obtained 
to seem doubtful. 

73. Great difficulties are associated with the null-class, and 
generally with the idea of nothing. It is plain that there is such a 
concept as nothing , and that in some sense nothing is something. In 
fact, the proposition “ nothing is not nothing ” is undoubtedly capable 
of an interpretation which makes it true — a point which gives rise to 
the contradictions discussed in Plato’s Sophist. In Symbolic Logic 
the null -class is the class which has no terms at all ; and symbolically 
it is quite necessary to introduce some such notion. We have to 
consider whether the contradictions which naturally arise can be 
avoided. 

It is necessary to realize, in the first place, that a concept may 
denote although it does not denote anything. This occurs when there 
are propositions in which the said concept occurs, and which are not 
about the said concept, but all such propositions are false. Or rather, 
the above is a first step towards the explanation of a denoting concept 
which denotes nothing. It is not, However, an adequate explanation. 
Consider, for example, the proposition “ chimaeras are animals” or 
“ even primes other than 2 are numbers.” These propositions appear 
to be true, and it would seem that they are not concerned with the 
denoting concepts, but with what these concepts denote; yet that is 
impossible, for the concepts in question do not denote anything. 



74 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, vi 

Symbolic Logic says that these concepts denote the null-class, and that 
the propositions in question assert that the null -class is contained in 
certain other classes. But with the strictly extensional view of classes 
propounded above, a class which has no terms fails to be anything at 
all : what is merely and solely a collection of terms cannot subsist when 
all the terms are removed. Thus we must either find a different 
interpretation of classes, or else find a method of dispensing with 
the null -class. 

The above imperfect definition of a concept which denotes, but 
does not denote anything, may be amended as follows. All denoting 
concepts, as we saw, are derived from class -concepts ; and a is a class- 
concept when “ x is an a” is a propositional function. The denoting 
concepts associated with a will not denote anything when and only 
when “j is an a " is false for all values of a\ This is a complete 
definition of a denoting concept which does not denote anything ; and 
in this case we shall say that a is a null class-concept, and that u all a’s " 
is a null concept of a class. Thus for a system such as Peano's, in 
which what are called classes are really class-concepts, technical difficulties 
need not arise ; but for us a genuine logical problem remains. 

The proposition “ chimaeras are animals’” may be easily interpreted 
by means of formal implication, as meaning “zr is a chimaera implies 
x is an animal for all values of x ? But in dealing with classes we 
have been assuming that propositions containing all or any or every, 
though equivalent to formal implications, were yet distinct from them, 
and involved ideas requiring independent treatment. Now in the case 
of chimaeras, it is easy to substitute the pure intensional view, according 
to which what is really stated is a relation of predicates : in the case in 
question the adjective animal is part of the definition of the adjective 
chimerical (if we allow ourselves to use this word, contrary to usage, 
to denote the defining predicate of chimaeras). But here again it is 
fairly plain that we are dealing with a proposition which implies that 
chimaeras are animals, but is not the same proposition — indeed, in the 
present case, the implication is not even reciprocal. By a negation 
we can give a kind of extensional interpretation : nothing is denoted 
by a chimaera which is not denoted bv an animal. But this is a very 
roundabout interpretation. On the whole, it seems most correct to 
reject the proposition altogether, while retaining the various other 
propositions that would be equivalent to it if there were chimaeras. 
By symbolic logicians, who have experienced the utility of the null- 
class, this will be felt as a reactionary view. But I am not at present 
discussing what should be done in the logical calculus, where the 
established practice appears to me the best, but what is the philo- 
sophical truth concerning the null -class. We shall say, then, that, 
of the bundle of normally equivalent interpretations of logical symbolic 
formulae, the class of interpretations considered in the present chapter, 



Classes 


75 


73 ] 

which are dependent upon actual classes, fail where we are concerned 
with null class-concepts, on the ground that there is no actual null-class. 

We may now reconsider the proposition “nothing is not nothing w — 
a proposition plainly true, and yet, unless carefully handled, a source of 
apparently hopeless antinomies. Nothing is a denoting concept, which 
denotes nothing. The concept which denotes is of course not nothing, 
i.e. it is not denoted by itself. The proposition which looks so para- 
doxical means no more than this : Nothing , the denoting concept, is 
not nothing, i.e. is not what itself denotes. But it by no means follows 
from this that there is an actual null -class : only the null class-concept 
and the null concept of a class are to be admitted. 

But now a new difficulty has to be met. The equality of class- 
concepts, like all relations which are reflexive, symmetrical, and transitive, 
indicates an underlying identity, i.e. it indicates that every class-concept 
has to some term a relation which all equal class-concepts also have to 
that term — the term in question being different for different sets of 
equal class-concepts, but the same for the various members of a single 
set of equal class-concepts. Now for all class-concepts which are not 
null, this term is found in the corresponding class ; but where are we 
to find it for null class -concepts ? To this question several answers may 
be given, any of which may be adopted. For we now know what a 
class is, and we may therefore adopt as our term the class of all null 
class-concepts or of all null propositional functions These are not null- 
classes, but genuine classes, and to either of them all null class -concepts 
have the same relation. If we then wish to have an entity analogous 
to what is elsewhere to be called a class, but corresponding to null 
class-concepts, we shall be forced, wherever it is necessary (as in counting 
classes) to introduce a term which is identical for equal class-concepts, 
to substitute everywhere the class of class -concepts equal to a given 
class-concept for the class corresponding to that class-concept. The 
class corresponding to the class-concept remains logically fundamental, 
but need not be actually employed in our symbolism. The null-class, 
in fact, is in some ways analogous to an irrational in Arithmetic: it 
cannot be interpreted on the same principles as other classes, and if 
we wish to give an analogous interpretation elsewhere, we must substitute 
for classes other more complicated entities — in the present case, certain 
correlated classes. The object of such a procedure will be mainly 
technical; but failure to understand the procedure will lead to in- 
extricable difficulties in the interpretation of the symbolism. A very 
closely analogous procedure occurs constantly in Mathematics, for 
example with eveiy generalization of number; and so far as I know, 
no single case in which it occurs has been rightly interpreted either by 
philosophers or by mathematicians. So many instances will meet us 
in the course of the present work that it is unnecessary to linger longer 
over the point at present. Only one possible misunderstanding must 



76 The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, vi 

be guarded against. No vicious circle is involved in the above account 
of the null-class ; for the general notion of class is first laid down, is 
found to involve what is called existence, is then symbolically, not 
philosophically, replaced by the notion of a class of equal class-concepts, 
and is found, in this new form, to be applicable to what corresponds to 
null class-concepts, since what corresponds is now a class which is not 
null. Between classes simpliciter and classes of equal class-concepts 
there is a one-one correlation, which breaks down in the sole case of the 
class of null class-concepts, to which no null-class corresponds ; and this 
fact is the reason for the whole complication. 

74. A question which is very fundamental in the philosophy of 
Arithmetic must now be discussed in a more or less preliminary fashion. Is 
a class which has many terms to be regarded as itself one or many? Taking 
the class as equivalent simply to the numerical conjunction “ A and B 
and C and etc.,” it seems plain that it is many ; yet it is quite necessary 
that we should be able to count classes as one each, and we do habitually 
speak of a class. Thus classes would seem to be one in one sense and 
many in another. 

There is a certain temptation to identify the class as many and the 
class as one, eg., all men and the human race. Nevertheless, wherever 
a class consists of more than one term, it can be proved that no such 
identification is permissible. A concept of a class, if it denotes a class 
as one, is not the same as any concept of the class which it denotes. 
That is to say, classes of all rational animals , which denotes the human 
race as one term, is different from men, which denotes men, i.e. the 
human race as many. But if the human race were identical with men, 
it would follow that whatever denotes the one must denote the other, 
and the above difference would be impossible. We might be tempted 
to infer that Beano's distinction, between a term and a class of which 
the said term is the only member, must be maintained, at least when the 
term in question is a class*. But it is more correct, I think, to infer an 
ultimate distinction between a class as many and a class as one, to 
hold that the many are only many, and are not also one. The class as 
one may be identified with the whole composed of the terms of the class, 
i.c., in the case of men, the class as one will be the human race. 

But can we now avoid the contradiction always to be feared, 
where there is something that cannot be made a logical subject ? 
I do not myself see any way of eliciting a precise contradiction in this 
case. In the case of concepts, we were dealing with what was plainly 
one entity ; in the present case, we are dealing with a complex essentially 
capable of analysis into units. In such a proposition as “A and B are 
two,” there is no logical subject: the assertion is not about A, nor 

* This conclusion is actually drawn by Frege from an analogous argument: 
Archiv fikr syst. Phil, i, p. 444. See Appendix. 



Classes 


77 


73-76] 

about B, nor about the whole composed of both, but strictly and only 
about A and B. Thus it would seem that assertions are not necessarily 
about single subjects, but may be about many subjects ; and this removes 
the contradiction which arose, in the case of concepts, from the im- 
possibility of making assertions about them unless .they were turned 
into subjects. This impossibility being here absent, the contradiction 
which was to be feared does not arise. 

76. We may ask, as suggested by the above discussion, what is to be 
said of the objects denoted by a man , every man , some man , and any man . 
Are these objects one or many or neither? Grammar treats them all as 
one. But to this view, the natural objection is, which one ? Certainly 
not Socrates, nor Plato, nor any other particular person. Can we 
conclude that no one is denoted? * As well might we conclude that 
every one is denoted, which in fact is true of the concept every man . 

I think one is denoted in every case, but in an impartial distributive 
manner. Any number is neither 1 nor 2 nor any other particular number, 
whence it is easy to conclude that any numlwr is not any one number, 
a proposition at first sight contradictory, but really resulting from an 
ambiguity in any, and more correctly expressed by “ any number is not 
Home one number.” There are, however, puzzles in this subject which 
I do not yet know how to solve. 

A logical difficulty remains in regard to the nature of the whole 
composed of all the terms of a class. Two propositions appear self- 
evident : (1) Two wholes composed of different terms must be different; 
(2) A whole composed of one term only is that one term. It follows 
that the whole composed of a class considered as one term is that class 
considered as one term, and is therefore identical with the whole 
composed of the terms of the class ; but this result contradicts the 
first of our supposed self-evident principles. The answer in this case, 
however, is not difficult. The first of our principles is only universally 
true when all the terms composing our two wholes are simple. A given 
whole is capable, if it has more than two parts, of being analyzed in a 
plurality of ways; and the resulting constituents, so long as analysis 
is not pushed as far as possible, will be different for different ways of 
analyzing. This proves that different sets of constituents may constitute 
the same whole, and thus disposes of our difficulty. 

76. Something must be said as to the relation of a term to a class 
of which it is a member, and as to the various allied relations. One of 
the allied relations is to be called e, and is to be fundamental in Symbolic 
Logic. But it is to some extent optional which of them we take as 
symbolically fundamental. 

Logically, the fundamental relation is that of subject and predicate, 
expressed in “Socrates is human” — a relation which, as we saw in 
Chapter iv, is peculiar in that the relatum cannot be regarded as a term 



86 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, vn 

referents and relata with respect to R, and these classes are unhesita- 
tingly admitted in such words as parents and children, masters and 
servants, husbands and wives, and innumerable Other instances from 
daily life, as also in logical notions such as premisses and conclusions, 
causes and effects, and so on. All such notions depend upon the class 
of propositions typified by xRy , where R is constant while x and y are 
variable. Yet it is very difficult to regard xRy as analyzable into the 
assertion R concerning x and z/, for the very sufficient reason that this 
view destroys the sense of the relation, i.e. its direction from x to y , 
leaving us with some assertion which is symmetrical with respect to 
x and z/, such as “ the relation R holds between x and y” Given a 
relation and its terms, in fact, two distinct propositions are possible. 
Thus if we take R itself to be an assertion, it becomes an ambiguous 
assertion : in supplying the term*, if we are to avoid ambiguity, we 
must decide which is referent and which relatum. We may quite 
legitimately regard ...Ry as an assertion, as was explained before; but 
here y has become constant. We may then go on to vary y , considering 
the class of assertions ...Ry for different values of y; but this process 
does not seem to be identical with that which is indicated by the 
independent variability of x and y in the propositional function xRy . 
Moreover, the suggested process requires the variation of an element 
in an assertion, namely of y in . and this is in itself a new and 
difficult notion. 

A curious point arises, in this connection, from the consideration, 
often essential in actual Mathematics, of a relation of a term to itself. 
Consider the propositional function x Rx, where R is a constant relation. 
Such functions are required in considering, eg ., the class of suicides or 
of self-made men ; or again, in considering the values of the variable 
for which it is equal to a certain function of itself, which may often be 
necessary in ordinary Mathematics. It seems exceedingly evident, in 
this case, that the proposition contains an element which is lost when 
it is analyzed into a term x and an assertion R. Thus here again, the 
propositional function must be admitted as fundamental. 

83. A difficult point arises as to the variation of the concept in a 
proposition. Consider, for example, all propositions of the type aRh , 
where a and b are fixed terms, and R is a variable relation. There 
seems no reason to doubt that the class-concept “ relation between a 
and b” is legitimate, and that there is a corresponding class ; but this 
requires the admission of such propositional functions as aRb , which, 
moreover, are frequently required in actual Mathematics, as, for example, 
in counting the number of many-one relations whose referents and relata 
are given classes. But if our variable is to have, as we normally 
require, an unrestricted field, it is necessary to substitute the pro- 
positional function “ R is a relation implies aRb” In this proposition 
the implication involved is material, not formal. If the implication were 



82, 83] Propositional Functions 87 

formal, the proposition would not be a function of R, but would be 
equivalent to the (necessarily false) proposition: “All relations hold 
between a and 6.” Generally we have some such proposition as "aRb 
implies < </> (R) provided R is a relation,” and we wish to turn this into a 
formal implication. If <f> (R) is a proposition for all values of R y our 
object is effected by substituting 44 If 4 R is a relation’ implies 'aRb,' 
then <f>(R ).” Here R can take all values *, and the */*and then is a formal 
implication, while the implies is a material implication. If <f>(R) is not 
a propositional function, but is a proposition only when R satisfies yfr(R), 
where yjr(R) is a propositional function implied by " R is a relation” for 
all values of R, then our formal implication can be put in the form 44 If 
4 R is a relation ’ implies aRb , then, for all values of R , yjr (R) implies 
<f> (ft)” where both the subordinate implications are material. As regards 
the material implication 44 4 R is a relation ’ implies aRb ,” this is always 
a proposition, whereas aRb is only a proposition when R is a relation. 
The new propositional function will only be true when R is a relation 
which does hold between a and b : when R is not a relation, the ante- 
cedent is false and the consequent is not a proposition, so that the 
implication is false; when R is a relation which does not hold between 
a and b , the antecedent is true and the consequent false, so that again 
the implication is false ; only when both are true is the implication true. 
Thus in defining the class of relations holding between a and b , the 
formally correct course is to define them as the values satisfying 44 J? 
is a relation implies aRb ” — an implication which, though it contains a 
variable, is not formal, but material, being satisfied by some only of the 
possible values of R. The variable R in it is, in Peano’s language, real 
and not apparent. 

The general principle involved is : If <f>T is only a proposition for 
some values of x, then Ui <j)X implies <£.r’ implies </>#” is a proposition 
for all values of or , and is true when and only when (fjx is true. (The 
implications involved are both material.) In some cases, "<f>x implies 
will be equivalent to some simpler propositional function y/rx (such as "R is 
a relation” in the above instance), which may then be substituted for itf. 

Such a propositional function as 44 R is a relation implies aRb ” 
appears even less capable than previous instances of analysis into R and 
an assertion about R , since we should have to assign a meaning to 44 a. . .6,” 
where the blank space may be filled by anything, not necessarily by a 
relation. There is here, however, a suggestion of an entity which has 
not yet been considered, namely the couple with sense. It may be 
doubted whether there is any such entity, and yet such phrases as 

* It is necessary to assign some meaning (other than a proposition) to aRb when 
R is not a relation, 

t A propositional function, though for every value of the variable it is true or 
false, is not itself true or false, beiug what is denoted by “ any proposition of the 
type in question,” which is not itself a proposition. 



88 


The Indejinables of Mathematics [chap, vn 

“R is a relation holding from a to b™ seem to show that its rejection 
would lead to paradoxes. This point, however, belongs to the theory 
of relations, and will be resumed in Chapter ix (§ 98). 

From what has been said, it appears that propositional functions 
must be accepted as ultimate data. It follows that formal implication 
and the inclusion of classes cannot be generally explained by means of a 
relation between assertions, although, where a propositional function 
asserts a fixed relation to a fixed term, the analysis into subject and 
assertion is legitimate and not unimportant. 

84. It only remains to say a few words concerning the derivation 
of classes from propositional functions. When we consider the xs suck 
that <f>x, where <f>x is a propositional function, we are introducing a 
notion of which, in the calculus of propositions* only a very shadowy use 
is made — I mean the notion of truth. AVe are considering, among 
all the propositions of the type c^r, those that are true: the corre- 
sponding values of x give the class defined by the function <f>x. It must 
be held, I think, that every propositional function which is not null 
defines a class, which is denoted by “x's such that <f>x” There is thus 
always a concept of the class, and the class-concept corresponding will 
be the singular, “ x such that fyx." But it maybe doubted — indeed the 
contradiction with which I ended the preceding chapter gives reason for 
doubting — whether there is always a defining predicate of such classes. 
Apart from the contradiction in question, this point might appear to be 
merely verbal: “ being an x such that (\>x” it might be said, may always 
be taken to be a predicate. But in view of our contradiction, all 
remarks on this subject must be viewed with caution. This subject, 
however, will be resumed in Chapter x. 

85. It is to be observed that, according to the theory of pro- 
positional functions here advocated, the <f> in <f>x is not a separate and 
distinguishable entity : it lives in the propositions of the form <f)X, and 
cannot survive analysis. I am highly doubtful whether such a view does 
not lead to a contradiction, but it appears to be forced upon us, and it 
has the merit of enabling us to avoid a contradiction arising from the 
opposite view. If <f> were a distinguishable entity, there would be a 
proposition asserting <f> of itself, which we may denote by <j) (</>) ; there 
would also be a proposition not-<£ (</>), denying <f> (<£). In this proposi- 
tion we may regard (f> as variable; we thus obtain a propositional 
function. The question arises: Can the assertion in this propositional 
function be asserted of itself? The assertion is non-assertibility of self, 
hence if it can be asserted of itself, it cannot, and if it cannot, it can. 
This contradiction is avoided by the recognition that the functional 
part of a propositional function is not an independent entity. As the 
contradiction in question is closely analogous to the other, concerning 
predicates not predicable of themselves, we may hope that a similar 
solution will apply there also. 



CHAPTER VIII. 


THE VARIABLE. 

86. The discussions of the preceding chapter elicited the funda- 
mental nature of the variable ; no apparatus of assertions enables us to 
dispense with the consideration of the varying of one or more elements 
in a proposition while the other elements remain unchanged. The 
variable is perhaps the most distinctively mathematical of all notions ; 
it is certainly also one of the most difficult to understand. The attempt, 
if not the deed, belongs to the present chapter. 

The theory as to the nature of the variable, which results from our 
previous discussions, is in outline the following. When a given term 
occurs as term in a proposition, that term may be replaced by any other 
while the remaining terms are unchanged. The class of propositions 
so obtained have what may be called constancy of form, and this con- 
stancy of form must be taken as a primitive idea. The notion of a class 
of propositions of constant form is more fundamental than the general 
notion of class, for the latter can be defined in terms of the former, 
but not the former in terms of the latter. Taking any term, a certain 
member of any class of propositions of constant form will contain that 
term. Thus jc, the variable, is what is denoted by any term , and <f>x, 
the propositional function, is what is denoted by the proposition of the 
form <f> in which x occurs. We may say that x is the x is any <f>x, where 
<f>x denotes the class of propositions resulting from different values of x. 
Thus in addition to propositional functions, the notions of any and of 
denoting are presupposed in the notion of the variable. This theory, 
which, I admit, is full of difficulties, is the least objectionable that I 
have been able to imagine. I shall now set it forth more in detail. 

87. Let us observe, to begin with, that the explicit mention of 
any , some, etc., need not occur in Mathematics : formal implication will 
express all that is required. Let us recur to an instance already dis- 
cussed in connection with denoting, where a is a class and h a class 
of classes. We have 

“ Any a belongs to any b ” is equivalent to “ ‘ x is an a' implies that 
‘w is a b' implies ‘x is a ; 



90 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap, vm 

“ Any a belongs to a b ” is equivalent to ut x is an a' implies ‘there 
is a ft, say «, such that a? is a u 

u Any a belongs to some ft” is equivalent to w there is a 6, say w, such 
that ' x is an a’ implies i x is a u ,r> ; 
and so on for the remaining relations considered in Chapter v. The 
question arises : How far do these equivalences constitute definitions of 
any, a, some, and how far are these notions involved in the symbolism 
itself ? 

The variable is, from the formal standpoint, the characteristic notion 
of Mathematics. Moreover it is the method of stating general theorems, 
which always mean something different from the intensional propositions 
to which such logicians as Mr Bradley endeavour to reduce them. That 
the meaning of an assertion about all men or any man is different from 
the meaning of an equivalent assertion about the concept man, appears 
to me, I must confess, to be a self-evident truth — as evident as the fact 
that propositions about John are not about Wianame John. This point, 
therefore, 1 shall not argue further. That the variable characterizes 
Mathematics will be generally admitted, though it is not generally 
perceived to be* present in elementary Arithmetic. Elementary Arith- 
metic, as taught to children, is characterized by the fact that the numbers 
occurring in it are constants ; the answer to any schoolboy’s sum is 
obtainable without propositions concerning any number. But the fact 
that this is the case can only be proved by the help of propositions 
about any number, and thus we are led from schoolboy’s Arithmetic to 
the Arithmetic which uses letters for numbers and proves general 
theorems. How very different this subject is from childhood’s enemy may 
be seen at once in such works as those of Dedekind f and StolzJ. Now 
the difference consists simply in this, that our numbers have now become 
variables instead of being constants. We now prove theorems concern- 
ing n , not concerning 3 or 4 or any other particular number. Thus it is 
absolutely essential to any theory of Mathematics to understand the 
nature of the variable. 

Originally, no doubt, the variable was conceived dynamically, as 
something which changed with the lapse of time, or, as is said, as some- 
thing which successively assumed all values of a certain class. This 
view cannot be too soon dismissed. If a theorem- is proved concerning 
71, it must not be supposed that n is a kind of arithmetical Proteus, 
which is 1 on Sundays and 2 on Mondays, and so on. Nor must it be 
supposed that n simultaneously assumes all its values. If n stands for 
any integer, we cannot say that n is 1, nor yet that it is 2 9 nor yet that 


* Here “ there is a c, r * where c is any class, is defined as equivalent to “ If p 
implies p, and ‘ x is a c ’ implies p for all values of x> then p is true.” 
t Was sind and was solten die Zahlen ? Brunswick, 1893. 

X Allyemeine Aritkmetik , Leipzig, 1885. 



The Variable 


91 


87-89] 

it is any other particular number. In fact, n just denotes any number, 
and this is something quite distinct from each and all of the numbers. 

It is not true that 1 is any number, though it is true that whatever 
holds of any number holds of 1. The variable, in short, requires the 
indefinable notion of any which was explained in Chapter v. 

88 . We may distinguish what may be called the true or formal 
variable from the restricted variable. A ny term is a concept denoting 
the true variable ; if u be a class not containing all terms, any u denotes 
a restricted variable. The terms included in the object denoted by the 
defining concept of a variable are called the values of the variable : thus 
every value of a variable is a constant. There is a certain difficulty 
about such propositions as “ any number is a number.* Interpreted by 
formal implication, they offer no difficulty, for they assert, merely that 
the propositional function “x is a number implies jr is a number* holds 
for all values of x. But if “ any number* Ik* taken to Ik* a definite 
object, it is plain that it is not identical with 1 or L Z or 3 or any number 
that may be mentioned. Yet these are all the numbers there are, so 
that “any number ” cannot Ik a number at all. The fact is that the 
concept “any number r> does denote one number, but not a particular 
one. This is just the distinctive point about any, that it denotes a term 
of a class, but in an impartial distributive manner, with no preference 
for one term over another. Thus although .r is a number, and no one 
number is x, yet there is here no contradiction, so soon as it is recognized 
that x is not one definite term. 

The notion of the restricted variable can Ik avoided, except in regard 
to propositional functions, by the introduction of a suitable hypothesis, 
namely the hypothesis expressing the restriction itself. But in respect 
of propositional functions this is not possible. The x in <£.r, where <f>x 
is a propositional function, is an unrestricted variable ; but the <f>x itself 
is restricted to the class which we may call <£. (It is to be remembered 
that the class is here fundamental, for we found it impossible, without a 
vicious circle, to discover any common characteristic by which the class 
could be defined, since the statement of any common characteristic is 
itself a propositional function.) By making our x always an unrestricted 
variable, we can speak of the variable, which is conceptually identical in 
Logic, Arithmetic, Geometry, and all other formal subjects. The terms 
dealt with are always all terms ; only the complex concepts that occur 
distinguish the various branches of Mathematics. 

89. We may now return to the apparent definability of any, some , 
and a, in terms of formal implication. Let a and h be cl ass -concepts, 
and consider the proposition “ any a is a h This is to be interpreted 
as meaning “x is an a implies x is a b* It is plain that, to begin with, 
the two propositions do 'not mean the same thing: for any a is a concept 
denoting only as, whereas in the formal implication x need not be an o. 
But we might, in Mathematics, dispense altogether with “ any a is a b 



92 


The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, vm 

and content ourselves with the formal implication : this is, in fact, 
symbolically the best course. The question to be examined, therefore, 
is: How far, if at all, do any and some and a enter into the formal 
implication ? (The fact that the indefinite article appears in 44 x is 
an a ” and 44 x is a ft ” is irrelevant, for these are merely taken as typical 
propositional functions.) We have, to begin with, a class of true 
propositions, each asserting of some constant term that if it is an a it is 
a ft. We then consider the restricted variable, 44 any proposition of this 
class.” We assert the truth of any term included among the values of 
this restricted variable. But in order to obtain the suggested formula, 
it is necessary to transfer the variability from the proposition as a whole 
to its variable term. In this way we obtain 44 x is an a implies x is ft.” 
But the genesis remains essential, for we are not here expressing a 
relation of two propositional functions 44 x is an a” and “x is a ft.” If 
this were expressed, we should not require the same x both times. Only 
one propositional function is involved, namely the whole formula. Each 
proposition of the class expresses a relation of one term of the pro- 
positional function 44 x is an a ” to one of 44 x is a ft ” ; and we may say, 
if we choose, that the whole formula expresses a relation of any term of 
44 x is an o” to some term of 44 a is a ft." We do not so much have 
an implication containing a variable as a variable implication. Or 
again, we may say that the first x is any term, but the second is some 
term, namely the first .r. We have a class of implications not containing 
variables, and we consider any member of this class. If any member 
is true, the fact is indicated by introducing a typical implication con- 
taining a variable. This typical implication is what is called a formal 
implication: it is any member of a class of material implications. Thus 
it would seem that any is presupposed in mathematical formalism, but 
that some and a may lie legitimately replaced by their equivalents in 
terms of formal implications. 

90. Although some may be replaced by its equivalent in terms of 
any, it is plain that this does not give the meaning of some. There is, 
in fact, a kind of duality of any and some : given a certain propositional 
function, if all terms belonging to the propositional function are asserted, 
we have any , while if one at least is asserted (which gives what is called 
an existence -theorem), we get some. The proposition <f>x asserted with- 
out comment, as in 44 .r is a man implies x is a mortal,” is to be taken 
to mean that fa' is true for all values of x (or for any value), but it 
might equally well have been taken to mean that <f>x is true for some 
value of x. In this way we might construct a calculus with two kinds 
of variable, the conjunctive and the disjunctive, in which the latter 
would occur wherever an existence -theorem was to be stated. But this 
method does not appear to possess any practical advantages. 

91 . It is to be observed that what is fundamental is not particular 
propositional functions, but the class-concept propositional function . A 



The Variable 


93 


89-93] 

propositional function is the class of all propositions which arise from 
the variation of a single term, but this is not to be considered as a 
definition, for reasons explained in the preceding chapter. 

92. From propositional functions all other classes can be derived 
by definition, with the help of the notion of such that. Given a pro- 
positional function <£.r, the terms such that, when x is identified with 
any one of them, (fix is true, are the class defined by <f>,r. This is the 
class as many, the class in extension. It is not to be assumed that every 
class so obtained has a defining predicate : this subject will be discussed 
afresh in Chapter x. But. it must be assumed, I think, that a class in 
extension is defined by any propositional function, and in particular 
that all terms form a class, since many propositional functions (e.g. 
all formal implications) are true of all terms. Here, as with formal 
implications, it is necessary that the whole propositional function whose 
truth defines the class should be kept intact, and not, even where this 
is possible for every value of a\ divided into separate propositional 
functions. For example, if a and h be two classes, defined by <j>x and y[rx 
respectively, their common part is defined by the product <f>x . yjr x y where 
the product has to be made for every value of .r, and then x varied 
afterwards. If this is not done, we do not necessarily have the same 
x in <f>x and y/rx. Thus we do not multiply propositional functions, but 
propositions : the new propositional function is the class of products 
of corresponding propositions belonging to the previous functions, and 
is by no means the product of <f>x and y/rx. It is only in virtue of 
a definition that the logical product of the classes defined by <f>x and y/rx 
is the class defined by <f>x . y/rx. And wherever a proposition containing 
an apparent variable is asserted, what is asserted is the truth, for all 
values of the variable or variables, of the propositional function corre- 
sponding to the whole proposition, and is never a relation of propositional 
functions. 

93. It appears from the above discussion that the variable is a 
very complicated logical entity, by no means easy to analyze correctly. 
The following appears to be as nearly correct as any analysis I can make. 
Given any proposition (not a propositional function), let a be one of 
its terms, and let us call the proposition <f> (a). Then in virtue of the 
primitive idea of a propositional function, if x be any term, we can 
consider the proposition <f) (x), which arises from the substitution of x 
in place of a . We thus arrive at the class of all propositions <f> (x). 
If all are true, <f> (#) is asserted simply : <f> ( x) may then be called a 
formal truth. In a formal implication, 4>(x\ for every value of x, states 
an implication, and the assertion of <f> {x) is the assertion of a class of 
implications, not of a single implication. If <f>(x) is sometimes true, 
the values of x which make it true form a class, which is the class defined 
by <f> (x) : the class is said to exist in this case. If <f> (x) is false for all 
values of *r, the class defined by <p («r) is said not to exist, and as a 



94 


The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, vm 

matter of fact, as we saw in Chapter vi, there is no such class, if classes 
are taken in extension. Thus a is, in some sense, the object denoted by 
any term ; yet this can hardly be strictly maintained, for different 
variables may occur in a proposition, yet the object denoted by any 
term y one would suppose, is unique. This, however, elicits a new point 
in the theory of denoting, namely that any term does not denote, 
projKTly speaking, an assemblage of terms, but denotes one term, only 
not one particular definite term. Thus any term may denote different 
terms in different places. We may say : any term has some relation to 
any term ; and this is quite a different proposition from : any term has 
some relation to itself. Thus variables have a kind of individuality. 
This arises, as I have tried to show, from propositional functions. 
When a propositional function has two variables, it must be regarded 
as obtained by successive steps. If the propositional function (f> (,r, y) 
is to be asserted for all values of jc and ?/, we must consider the assertion, 
for all values of y y of the propositional function ;//), where a is 

a constant. This does not involve //, and may be represented by yfr (a). 
We then vary a , and assert yjr(.r) for all values of a\ The process is 
analogous to double integration ; and it is necessary to prove formally 
that the order in which the variations an* made makes no difference 
to the result. The individuality of variables appears to be thus ex- 
plained. A variable is not any term simply, but any term as entering 
into a propositional function. We may say, if <£.r be a propositional 
function, that .r is the term in any proposition of the class of proposi- 
tions whose type is It thus appears that, as regards propositional 

functions, the notions of class, of denoting, and of any, are fundamental, 
being presupposed in the symbolism employed. With this conclusion, 
the analysis of formal implication, which has been one of the principal 
problems of Part I, is carried as s far as I am able to carry it. May 
some reader succeed in rendering it more complete, and in answering the 
many questions which I have had to leave unanswered. 



CHAPTER IX. 


RELATIONS. 

94. Next after subject-predicate propositions come two types of 
propositions which appear equally simple. These are the propositions 
in which a relation is asserted between two terms, and those in which 
two terms are said to be two. The latter class of propositions will be 
considered hereafter; the former must be considered at once. It has 
often been held that every proposition can be reduced to one of the 
subject-predicate type, but this view we shall, throughout the present 
work, find abundant reason for rejecting. It might be held, however, 
that all propositions not of the subject-predicate type, and not asserting 
numbers, could be reduced to propositions containing two terms and 
a relation. This opinion would be more difficult to refute, but this too, 
we shall find, has no good grounds in its favour*. We may therefore 
allow that there are relations having more than two terms ; but as these 
are more complex, it will be well to consider first such as have two 
terms only. 

A relation between two terms is a concept which occurs in a 
proposition in which there are two terms not occurring as concepts f, 
and in which the interchange of the two terms gives a different pro- 
position. This last mark is required to distinguish a relational 
proposition from one of the type “ a and h are two," which is identical 
with “ b and a are two." A relational proposition may be symbolized 
by aRb , where R is the relation and a and b are the terms ; and aRb 
will then always, provided a and b are not identical, denote a different 
proposition from bRa. That is to say, it is characteristic of a relation 
of two terms that it proceeds, so to speak, from one to the other. This 
is what may be called the sense of the relation, and is, as we shall find, 
the source of order and series. It must be held as an axiom that aRb 
implies and is implied by a relational proposition bR'a , in which the 

* See in/., Part IV, Chap, xxv, § 200. 

+ This description, as we saw above (§ 48), excludes the pseudo-relation of subject 
to predicate. 



96 The Indejinables of Mathematics [chap, ix 

relation R' proceeds from b to a, and may or may not be the same 
relation as R. But even when aRb implies and is implied by bRa , 
it must be strictly maintained that these are different propositions. 
We may distinguish the term from which the relation proceeds as the 
referent , and the term to which it proceeds as the relatum. The sense 
of a relation is a fundamental notion, which is not capable of definition. 
The relation which holds between b and a whenever R holds between 
a and b will be called the converse of /£, and will be denoted (following 
Schrcxler) by R. The relation of R to R is the relation of oppositeness, 
or difference of sense ; and this must not be defined (as would seem at 
first sight legitimate) by the above mutual implication in any single 
case, but only by the fact of its holding for all cases in which the given 
relation occurs. The grounds for this view are derived from certain 
propositions in whicli terms are related to themselves not-symmetrically, 
i.e. by a relation whose converse is not identical with itself. These 
propositions must now be examined. 

95. There is a certain temptation to affirm that no term can be 
related to itself ; and there is a still stronger temptation to affirm that, 
if a term can be related to itself, the relation must be symmetrical, 
i.e. identical with its converse. But both these temptations must be 
resisted. In the first place, if no term were related to itself, we should 
never be able to assert self-identity, since this is plainly a relation. 
But since there is such a notion as identity, and since it seems undeniable 
that every term is identical with itself, we must allow that a term may 
be related to itself. Identity, however, is still a symmetrical relation, 
and may be admitted without any great qualms. The matter becomes 
far worse when we have to admit not-symmetrical relations of terms 
to themselves. Nevertheless the following propositions seem undeniable ; 
Being is, or has being ; 1 is one, or has unity ; concept is conceptual : 
term is a term ; class-concept is a class-concept. All these are of one 
of the three equivalent types which we distinguished at the beginning of 
Chapter v, which may be called respectively subject-predicate proposi- 
tions, propositions asserting the relation of predication, and propositions 
asserting membership of a class. What we have to consider is, then, 
the fact that a predicate may be predicable of itself. It is necessary, for 
our present purpose, to take our propositions in the second form (Socrates 
has humanity), since the subject-predicate form is not in the above sense 
relational. We may take, as the type of such propositions, “unity has 
unity.” Now it is certainly undeniable that the relation of predication 
is asymmetrical, since subjects cannot in general be predicated of their 
predicates. Thus “ unity has unity ” asserts one relation of unity to 
itself, and implies another, namely the converse relation : unity has 
to itself both the relation of subject to predicate, and the relation of 
predicate to subject. Now if the referent and the relatum are identical, 
it is plain that the relatum has to the referent the same relation as the 



Relations 


97 


94-96] 

referent has to the relatum. Hence if the converse of a relation in 
a particular case were defined bv mutual implication in that particular 
case, it would appear that, in the present case, our relation has two 
converses, since two different relations of relatum to referent are implied 
by “ unity has unity.” We must therefore define the converse of a 
relation by the fact that aRb implies and is implied by bRa whatever 
a and b may be, and whether or not the relation R holds between them. 
That is to say, a and b are here essentially variables, and if we give 
them any constant value, we may find that aRb implies and is implied 
by bR'a, where R ' is some relation other than R. 

Thus three points must be noted with regard to relations of two 
terms: (1) they all have sense, so that, provided a and b are not 
identical, we can distinguish aRb from bRa ; (2) they all have a 
converse, i.e. a relation H such that aRb implies and is implied by 
bRa, whatever a and b may be ; (3) some relations hold between a 
term and itself, and such relations are not necessarily symmetrical, 
i.e. there may be two different relations, which are each other’s con- 
verses, and which both hold between a term and itself. 

96. For the general theory of relations, especially in its mathe- 
matical developments, certain axioms relating classes and relations are 
of great importance. It is to be held that to have a given relation to a 
given term is a predicate, so that all terms having this relation to this 
term form a class. It is to be held further that to have a given relation 
at all is a predicate, so that all referents with respect to a given relation 
form a class. It follows, by considering the converse relation, that all 
relata also form a class. These two classes 1 shall call respectively the 
domain and the converse domain of the relation ; the logical sum of the 
two I shall call the field of the relation. 

The axiom that all referents with respect to a given relation form a 
class seems, however, to require some limitation, and that on account of 
the contradiction mentioned at the end of Chapter vi. This contra- 
diction may be stated as follows. We saw that some predicates can be 
predicated of themselves. Consider now those of which this is not the 
case. These are the referents (and also the relata) in what seems like 
a complex relation, namely the combination of non-predicability with 
identity. But there is no predicate which attaches to all of them and 
to no other terms. For this predicate will either be predicable or not 
predicable of itself. If it is predicable of itself, it is one of those 
referents by relation to which it was defined, and therefore, in virtue 
of their definition, it is not predicable of itself. Conversely, if it is not 
predicable of itself, then again it is one of the said referents, of all of 
which (by hypothesis) it is predicable, and therefore again it is predicable 
of itself. This is a contradiction, which shows that all the referents 
considered have no exclusive common predicate, and therefore, if defining 
predicates are essential to classes, do not form a class. 



98 


The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, ix 

The matter may be put otherwise. In defining the would-be class of 
predicates, all those not predicable of themselves have been used up. 
The common predicate of all these predicates cannot be one of them, 
since for each of them there is at least one predicate (namely itself) of 
which it is not predicable. But again, the supposed common predicate 
cannot be any other predicate, for if it were, it would be prcdicable of 
itself, i.c. it would be a member of the supposed class of predicates, since 
these were defined as those of which it is predicable. Thus no predicate 
is left over which could attach to all the predicates considered. 

It follows from the above that not every definable collection of 
terms forms a class defined by a common predicate. This fact must be 
borne in mind, and we must endeavour to discover what properties a 
collection must have in order to form such a class. The exact point 
established by the above contradiction may be stated as follow s : A pro- 
position apparently containing only one variable may not be equivalent 
to any proposition asserting that the variable in question has a certain 
predicate. It remains an open question whether every class must have 
a defining predicate. 

That all terms having a given relation to a given term form a class 
defined by an exclusive common predicate results from the doctrine of 
Chapter vn, that the proposition a lib can be analyzed into the subject 
a and the assertion Rb. To l^e a term of which Rb can lx asserted 
appears to be plainly a predicate. But it does not follow, I think, 
that to be a term of which, for some value of y , Ry can lx asserted, is 
a predicate. The doctrine of propositional functions requires, however, 
that all terms having the latter property should form a class. This 
class I shall call the domain of the relation R as well as the class of 
referents. The domain of the converse relation will lx also called the 
converse domain, as well as the class of relata. The two domains 
together will be called the field of the relation — a notion chiefly im- 
portant as regards series. Thus if paternity be the relation, fathers form 
its domain, children its converse domain, and fathers and children 
together its field. 

It may be doubted whether a proposition aRb can be regarded as 
asserting aR of b, or whether only Ra can be asserted of b. In other 
words, is a relational proposition only an assertion concerning the 
referent, or also an assertion concerning the relatum? If we take the 
latter view, we shall have, connected with (say) “ a is greater than b” 
four assertions, namely “ is greater than b” “ a is greater than," “ is less 
than a" and “ b is less than." I am inclined myself to adopt this view, 
but I know of no argument on either side. 

97. We can form the logical sum and product of two relations or 
of a class of relations exactly as in the case of classes, except that here 
we have to deal with double variability. In addition to these ways of 
combination, we have also the relative product, which is in general non- 



Relations 


99 


96 - 99 ] 

commutative, and therefore requires that the number of factors should 
be finite. If J?, S be two relations, to say that their relative product 
RS holds between two terms x 9 z is to say that there is a term y to 
which x has the relation R , and which itself has the relation S to z. Thus 
brother-in-law is the relative product of wife and brother or of sister 
and husband : father-in-law is the relative product of wife and father, 
whereas the relative product of father and wife is mother or step-mother. 

98 . There is a temptation to regard a relation as definable in 
extension as a class of couples. This has the formal advantage that it 
avoids the necessity for the primitive proposition asserting that every 
couple has a relation holding between no other pair of terms. But it is 
necessary to give sense to the couple, to distinguish the referent from the 
relatum : thus a couple becomes essentially distinct from a class of two 
terms, and must itself be introduced as a primitive idea. It would seem, 
viewing the matter philosophically, that sense can only be derived from 
some relational proposition, and that the assertion that a is referent and 
b relatum already involves a purely relational proposition in which a and 
b are terms, though the relation asserted is only the general one of 
referent to relatum. There are, in fact, concepts such as greater , which 
occur otherwise than as terms in propositions having two terms (§§ 48, 54); 
and no doctrine of couples can evade such propositions. It seems there- 
fore more correct to take an intensional view of relations, and to identify 
them rather with class -concepts than with classes. This procedure is 
formally more convenient, and seems also nearer to the logical facts. 
Throughout Mathematics there is the same rather curious relation of 
intensional and extensional points of view : the symbols other than 
variable terms ( i.e . the variable class-concepts and relations) stand for 
intensions, while the actual objects dealt with are always extensions. 
Thus in the calculus of relations, it is classes of couples that are relevant, 
but the symbolism deals with them by means of relations. This is 
precisely similar to the state of things explained in relation to classes, 
and it seems unnecessary to repeat the explanations at length. 

99 . Mr Bradley, in Appearance and Reality , Chapter hi, has based 
an argument against the reality of relations upon the endless regress 
arising from the fact that a relation which relates two terms must 
be related to each of them. The endless regress is undeniable, if 
relational propositions are taken to be ultimate, but it is very doubtful 
whether it forms any logical difficulty. We have already had occasion 
(§ 55) to distinguish two kinds of regress, the one proceeding merely to 
perpetually new implied propositions, the other in the meaning of a 
proposition itself; of these two kinds, we agreed that the former, since 
the solution of the problem of infinity, has ceased to be objectionable, 
while the latter remains inadmissible. We have to inquire which kind 
of regress occurs in the present instance. It may be urged that it is 
part of the very meaning of a relational proposition that the relation 



100 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap. IX 

involved should have to the terms the relation expressed in saying that 
it relates them, and that this is what makes the distinction, which we 
formerly (§ 54) left unexplained, between a relating relation and a relation 
in itself. It may be urged, however, against this view, that the assertion 
of a relation between the relation and the terms, though implied, is no 
part of the original proposition, and that a relating relation is dis- 
tinguished from a relation in itself by the indefinable element of assertion 
which distinguishes a proposition from a concept. Against this it 
might be retorted that, in the concept “ difference of a and 6,” difference 
relates a and h just as much as in the proposition “ a and b differ”; but 
to this it may be rejoined that we found the difference of a and 6, except 
in so far as some specific point of difference may be in question, to be 
indistinguishable from bare difference. Thus it seems impossible to 
prove that the endless regress involved is of the objectionable kind. 
We may distinguish, I think, between “ a exceeds 6” and “ a is greater 
than 6,” though it would be absurd to deny that people usually mean 
the same thing by these two propositions. On the principle, from which 
I can see no escape, that every genuine word must have some meaning, 
the is and than must form part of “ a is greater than J,” which thus 
contains more than two terms and a relation. The is seems to state 
that a has to greater the relation of referent, while the than states 
similarly that b has to greater the relation of relation. But “ a exceeds 
b” may be held to express solely the relation of a to A, without in- 
cluding any of the implications of further relations. Hence we shall 
have to conclude that a relational proposition aKb does not include 
in its meaning any relation of a or b to R , and that the endless regress, 
though undeniable, is logically quite harmless. With these remarks, 
we may leave the further theory of relations to later Parts of the present 
work. 



CHAPTER X. 


THE CONTRADICTION. 

100. Before taking leave of fundamental questions, it is necessary 
to examine more in detail the singular contradiction, already mentioned, 
with regard to predicates not predicable of themselves. Before attempt- 
ing to solve this puzzle, it will be well to make some deductions connected 
with it, and to state it in various different forms. I may mention that I 
was led to it in the endeavour to reconcile Cantor's proof that there can 
be no greatest cardinal number with the very plausible supposition that 
the class of all terms (which we have seen to be essential to all formal 
propositions) has necessarily the greatest possible number of members*. 

Let w be a class-concept which can he asserted of itself, i.c. such that 
“ w is a w” Instances are class-concept, and the negations of ordinary 
class-concepts, e.g. not-man. Then (a) if re be contained in another class v, 
since w is a w, w is a v ; consequently there is a term of v which is 
a class-concept that can be asserted of itself. Hence by contraposition, 
(/3) if a be a class-concept none of whose members are class-concepts 
that can be asserted of themselves, no class-concept contained in u can 
be asserted of itself. Hence further, (7) if u be any class-concept what- 
ever, and u the class-concept of those members of n which are not 
predicable of themselves, this class -concept is contained in itself, and 
none of its members are predicable of themselves ; hence by (0) u is not 
predicable of itself. Thus u is not a u , and is therefore not a it ; for 
the terms of u that are not terms of n are all predicable of themselves, 
which u is not. Thus (8) if u be any class-concept whatever, there is a 
class-concept contained in u which is not a member of ?/, and is also one 
of those class-concepts that are not predicable of themselves. So far, our 
deductions seem scarcely open to question. But if we now take the last 
of them, and admit the class of those class-concepts that cannot be 
asserted of themselves, we find that this class must contain a class-concept 
not a member of itself and yet not belonging to the class in question. 

We may observe also that, in virtue of what we have proved in (0), the 
class of class-concepts which cannot be asserted of themselves, which we 
* See Part V, Chap, xliii, § 344 ff. 



102 


The Indefinables of Mathematics [chap. X 

will call w, contains as members of itself all its sub-classes, although it is 
easy to prove that every class has more sub-classes than terms. Again, 
if y be any term of w>, and w be the whole of w except y, then w\ being 
a sub-class of w> is not a w but is a w 9 and therefore is y . Hence each 
class-concept which is a term of w has all other terms of w as its 
extension. It follows that the concept bicycle is a teaspoon, and teaspoon 
is a bicycle. This is plainly absurd, and any number of similar 
absurdities can be proved. 

101. I^et us leave these paradoxical consequences, and attempt the 
exact statement of the contradiction itself. We have first the statement 
in terms of predicates, which has been given already. If x be a predicate, 
o' may or may not be predicable of itself. Let us assume that “not- 
predicable of oneself ” is a predicate. Then to suppose either that this 
predicate is, or that it is not, predicable of itself, is self-contradictory. 
The conclusion, in this case, seems obvious : “ not-predicable of oneself” 
is not a predicate. 

Let us now state the same contradiction in terms of class-concepts. 
A class-concept may or may not be a term of its own extension. “Class- 
concept which is not a term of its own extension” appears to be a class- 
concept. But if it is a term of its own extension, it is a class-concept 
which is not a term of its own extension, and vice versa. Thus we must 
conclude, against appearances, that “class-concept which is not a term of 
its own extension” is not a class-concept. 

In terms of classes the contradiction appears even more extraordinary. 
A class as one may be a term of itself as many. Thus the class of all 
classes is a class; the class of all the terms that are not men is not a man, 
and so on. Do all the classes that have this property form a class ? If 
so, is it as one a member of itself as many or not ? If it is, then it is 
one of the classes which, as ones, are not members of themselves as many, 
and vive versa. Thus we must conclude again that the classes which as 
ones are not members of themselves as many do not form a class — or 
rather, that they do not form a class as one, for the argument cannot 
show that they do not form a class as many. 

102. A similar result, which, however, does not lead to a contradic- 
tion, may be proved concerning any relation. Let R be a relation, and 
consider the class iv of terms which do not have the relation R to them- 
selves. Then it is impossible that there should be any term a to which 
all of them and no other terms have the relation R. For, if there were 
such a term, the propositional function “ oc does not have the relation R 
to x" would be equivalent to “«r has the relation R to a.” Substituting 
a for .r throughout, which is legitimate since the equivalence is formal, 
we find a contradiction. AY hen in place of R we put 6, the relation of 
a term to a class-concept which can be asserted of it, we get the above 
contradiction. The reason that a contradiction emerges here is that 
we have taken it as an axiom that any propositional function containing 



The Contradiction 


103 


100-103] 

only one variable is equivalent to asserting membership of a class defined 
by the propositional function. Either this axiom, or the principle that 
every class can be taken as one term, is plainly false, and there is no 
fundamental objection to dropping either. But having dropped the 
former, the question arises : Which propositional functions define classes 
which are single terms as well as many, and which do not ? And with 
this question our real difficulties begin. 

Any method by which we attempt to establish a one-one or many- 
one correlation of all terms and all propositional functions must omit at 
least one propositional function. Such a method would exist if all 
propositional functions could be expressed in the form . ..cz/, since this 
form correlates it with ...€?/. But the impossibility of any such correla- 
tion is proved as follows. Let (f> x be a propositional function correlated 
with then, if the correlation covers all terms, the denial of <f> x (.r) will 
be a propositional function, since it is a proposition for all values of or. 
But it cannot be included in the correlation ; for if it were correlated 
with z/, <f> a (.r) would be equivalent, for all values of .r, to the denial of 
); but this equivalence is impossible for the value zz, since it makes 
< p n (a ) equivalent to its own denial. It follows that there are more 
propositional functions than terms — a result which seems plainly impos- 
sible, although the proof is as convincing as any in Mathematics. We 
shall shortly see how the impossibility is removed by the doctrine of 
logical types. 

103. The first method which suggests itself is to seek an ambiguity 
in the notion of e. But in Chapter vi we distinguished the various 
meanings as far as any distinction seemed possible, and we have just 
seen that with each meaning the same contradiction emerges. Let us, 
however, attempt to state the contradiction throughout in terms of 
propositional functions. Every propositional function which is not null, 
we supposed, defines a class, and every class can certainly be defined by 
a propositional function. Thus to say that a class as one is not a 
member of itself as many is to say that the class as one does not satisfy 
the function by which itself as many is defined. Since all propositional 
functions except such as are null define classes, all will be used up, in 
considering all classes having the above property, except such as do not 
have the above property. If any propositional function were satisfied 
by every class having the above property, it would therefore necessarily 
be one satisfied also by the class w of all such classes considered as a 
single term. Hence the class xv does not itself belong to the class xv, 
and therefore there must be some propositional function satisfied by the 
terms of w but not by xv itself. Thus the contradiction re-emerges, and 
we must suppose, either that there is no such entity as xv, or that there 
is no propositional function satisfied by its terms and by no others. 

It might be thought that a solution could be found by denying the 
legitimacy of variable propositional functions. If we denote by for 



104 


The Indefinable s of Mathematics [chap, x 

the moment, the class of values satisfying <f > , our propositional function 
is the denial of where <f> is the variable. The doctrine of 

Chapter vii, that ( f > is not a separable entity, might make such a variable 
seem illegitimate ; but this objection can be overcome by substitut- 
ing for the class of propositions <f>x 9 or the relation of <f>x to x* 
Moreover it is impossible to exclude variable propositional functions 
altogether. Wherever a variable class or a variable relation occurs, 
we have admitted a variable propositional function, which is thus 
essential to assertions about every class or about every relation. The 
definition of the domain of a relation, for example, and all the general 
propositions which constitute the calculus of relations, would be swept 
away by the refusal to allow this type of variation. Thus we require 
some further characteristic by which to distinguish two kinds of varia- 
tion. This characteristic is to be found, I think, in the independent 
variability of the function and the argument. In general, <f>x is itself 
a function of two variables, </> and x ; of these, either may be given a 
constant value, and either may be varied without reference to the other. 
But in the type of propositional functions we are considering in this 
Chapter, the argument is itself a function of the propositional function : 
instead of <f)X 9 we have </> [/*($)}, where is defined as a function of 
<f>. Thus when </> is varied, the argument of which <f> is asserted is 
varied too. Thus “x is an x” is equivalent to: “ (f> can be asserted of 
the class of terms satisfying (f> ” this class of terms being x. If here 
<f> is varied, the argument is varied at the same time in a manner 
dependent upon the variation of (f > . Tor this reason, <f> [/*(<£)), though 
it is a definite proposition when x is assigned, is not a propositional 
function, in the ordinary sense, when x is variable. Propositional 
functions of this doubtful type may be called quadratic form $ 9 because 
the variable enters into them in a way somewhat analogous to that in 
which, in Algebra, a variable appears in an expression of the second 
degree. 

104. Perhaps the best way to state the suggested solution is to say 
that, if a collection of terms can only be defined by a variable pro- 
positional function, then, though a class as many may be admitted, 
a class as one must be denied. When so stated, it appears that propo- 
sitional functions may be varied, provided the resulting collection is 
never itself made into the subject in the original propositional function. 
In such cases there is only a class as many, not a class as one. We took 
it as axiomatic that the class as one is to be found wherever there is 
a class as many ; but this axiom need not be universally admitted, 
and appears to have been the source of the contradiction. By denying 
it, therefore, the whole difficulty will be overcome. 

A class as one, we shall say, is an object of the same type as its 
terms ; i.e. any propositional function <f> (.r) which is significant when one 
of the terms is substituted for x is also significant when the class as one 



The Contradiction 


105 


103 - 105 ] 

is substituted. But the class as one does not always exist, and the clfcss 
as many is of a different type from the terms of the class, even when the 
class has only one term, i.e. there are propositional functions <f>(u) in 
which u may be the class as many, which are meaningless if, for u y we 
substitute one of the terms of the class. And so “ x is one among x\ " 
is not a proposition at all if the relation involved is that of a term to its 
class as many ; and this is the only relation of whose presence a pro- 
positional function always assures us. In this view, a class as many may 
be a logical subject, but in propositions of a different kind from those in 
which its terms are subjects ; of any object other than a single term, the 
question whether it is one or many will have different answers according 
to the proposition in which it occurs. Thus we have “ Socrates is one 
among men,” in which men are plural ; but u men are one among species 
of animals,” in which men are singular. It is the distinction of logical 
types that is the key to the whole mystery*. 

105. Other ways of evading the contradiction, which might be 
suggested, appear undesirable, on the ground that they destroy too 
many quite necessary kinds of propositions. It might be suggested 
that identity is introduced in “ x is not an x ” in a way which is not 
permissible. But it has been already shown that relations of terms 
to themselves are unavoidable, and • it may be observed that suicides 
or self-made men or the heroes of Smiles’s Self-Help are all defined 
by relations to themselves. And generally, identity enters in a very 
similar way into formal implication, so that it is quite impossible to 
reject it. 

A natural suggestion for escaping from the contradiction would be 
to demur to the notion of aU terms or of all classes. It might be 
urged that no such sum-total is conceivable ; and if all indicates a whole, 
our escape from the contradiction requires us to admit this. But we 
have already abundantly seen that if this view were maintained against 
any term, all formal truth would be impossible, and Mathematics, whose 
characteristic is the statement of truths concerning any term, would be 
abolished at one stroke. Thus the correct statement of formal truths 
requires the notion of any term or every term, but not the collective 
notion of all terms. 

It should be observed, finally, that no peculiar philosophy is involved 
in the above contradiction, which springs directly from common sense, 
and can only be solved by abandoning some common-sense assumption. 
Only the Hegelian philosophy, which nourishes itself on contradictions, 
can remain indifferent, because it finds similar problems everywhere. In 
any other doctrine, so direct a challenge demands an answer, on pain 
of a confession of impotence. Fortunately, no other similar difficulty, 
so far as I know, occurs in any other portion of the Principles of 
Mathematics. 


* On this subject, see Appendix. 



106 


The Indejinables of Mathematics [chap, x 

106 . We may now briefly review the conclusions arrived at in 
Part I. Pure Mathematics was defined as the class of propositions 
asserting formal implications and containing no constants except logical 
constants. And logical constants are : Implication, the relation of a 
term to a class of which it is a member, the notion of such that , the 
notion of relation, and such further notions as are involved in formal 
implication, which we found (§ 93) to be the following: propositional 
function, class*, denoting, and any or every term. This definition brought 
Mathematics into very close relation to Logic, and made it practically 
identical with Symbolic Logic. An examination of Symbolic Logic justi- 
fied the above enumeration of mathematical indefinables. In Chapter m 
we distinguished implication and formal implication. The former holds 
between any two propositions provided the first be false or the second 
true. The latter is not a relation, but the assertion, for every value 
of the variable or variables, of a propositional function which, for every 
value of the variable or variables, asserts an implication. Chapter iv 
distinguished what may be called things from predicates and relations 
(including the is of predications among relations for this purpose). It 
was shown that this distinction is connected with the doctrine of 
substance and attributes, but does not lead to the traditional results. 
Chapters v and vi developed the theory of predicates. In the former 
of these chapters it was shown that certain concepts, derived from 
predicates, occur in propositions not about themselves, but about com- 
binations of terms, such as are indicated by aU H every , any, a 9 some , and 
the. Concepts of this kind, we found, are fundamental in Mathematics, 
and enable us to deal with infinite classes by means of propositions of 
finite complexity. In Chapter vi we distinguished predicates, class- 
concepts, concepts of classes, (‘lasses as many, and classes as one. We 
agreed that single terms, or such combinations as result from and . are 
classes, the latter being classes as many ; and that classes as many 
are the objects denoted by concepts of classes, which are the plurals 
of class -concepts. Hut in the present chapter we decided that it is 
necessary to distinguish a single term from the class whose only member 
it is, and that consequently the null -class may be admitted. 

In Chapter vn we resumed the study of the verb. Subject-predicate 
propositions, and such as express a fixed relation to a fixed term, could 
be analyzed, we found, into a subject and an assertion ; but this analysis 
becomes impossible when a given term enters into a proposition in a 
more complicated manner than as referent of a relation. Hence it 
became necessary to take propositional function as a primitive notion. 
A propositional function of one variable is anv proposition of a set 
defined by the variation of a single term, while the other terms remain 

* 'Hie notion of class in general, we decided, could be replaced, as an indefinable, 
by that of the class of propositions defined by a propositional function. 



The Contradiction 


107 


106] 

constant. But in general it is impossible to define or isolate the 
constant element in a propositional function, since what remains, when 
a certain term, wherever it occurs, is left out of a proposition, is in 
general no discoverable kind of entity. Thus the term in question 
must be not simply omitted, but replaced by a variable. 

The notion of the variable, we found, is exceedingly complicated. 
The x is not simply any term, but any term with a certain individuality; 
for if not, any two variables would be indistinguishable. We agreed 
that a variable is any term qua term in a certain propositional function, 
and that variables are distinguished by the propositional functions in 
which they occur, or, in the case of several variables, by the place they 
occupy in a given multiply variable propositional function. A variable, 
we said, is the term in any proposition of the set denoted by a given 
propositional function. 

Chapter ix pointed out that relational propositions are ultimate, 
and that they all have sense : i.v. the relation being the concept as such 
in a proposition with two terms, there is another proposition containing 
the same terms and the same concept as such, as in “ A is greater 
than B 11 and “ B is greater than A” These two propositions, though 
different, contain precisely the same constituents. This is a characteristic 
of relations, and an instance of the loss resulting from analysis. Rela- 
tions, we agreed, are to be taken intensionally, not as classes of couples*. 

Finally, in the present chapter, we examined the contradiction re- 
sulting from the apparent fact that, if w be the class of all classes which 
as single terms are not members of themselves as many, then w as one 
can be proved both to be and not to be a member of itself as many. 
The solution suggested was that it is necessary to distinguish various 
types of objects, namely terms, classes of terms, classes of classes, classes 
of couples of terms, and so on ; and that a propositional function <f>x in 
general requires, if it is to have any meaning, that x should belong to 
some one type. Thus xex was held to be meaningless, because e requires 
that the relatum should be a class composed of objects which are of the 
type of the referent. The class as one, where it exists, is, we said, of the 
same type as its constituents ; but a quadratic propositional function in 
general appears to define only a class as many, and the contradiction 
proves that the class as one, if it ever exists, is certainly sometimes 
absent. 

* On this point, however, see Appendix. 




PART 


II. 


NUMBER. 




CHAPTER XI. 


DEFINITION OF CARDINAL NUMBERS. 

107. Wk have now briefly reviewed the apparatus of general logical 
notions with which Mathematics operates. In the present Part, it is to 
be shown how this apparatus suffices, without new indefinable!* or new 
postulates, to establish the whole theory of cardinal integers as a sjiecial 
branch of Logic*. No mathematical subject has made, in recent years, 
greater advances than the theory of Arithmetic. The movement in 
favour of correctness in deduction, inaugurated by W cierstrass, has been 
brilliantly continued by Dedekind, Cantor, Frege, and Peano, and attains 
what seems its final goal by means of the logic of relations. As the 
modern mathematical theory is but imperfectly known even by most 
mathematicians, I shall begin this Part, by four chapters setting forth 
its outlines in a non-symbolic form. I shall then examine the process 
of deduction from a philosophical standpoint, in order to discover, if 
possible, whether any unperceived assumptions have covertly intruded 
themselves in the course of the argument. 

108. It is often held that both number and particular numbers are 
indefinable. Now definability is a word which, in Mathematics, has a 
precise sense, though one which is relative to some given set of notionsf. 
Given any set of notions, a term is definable by means of these notions 
when, and only when, it is the only term having to certain of these 
notions a certain relation which itself is one of the said notions. But 
philosophically, the word definition has not, as a rule, been employed in 
this sense; it has, in fact, been restricted to the analysis of an idea 
into its constituents. This usage is inconvenient and, I think, useless ; 
moreover it seems to overlook the fact that wholes are not , as a 

* Cantor has shown that it is necessary to separate the study of Cardinal and 
Ordinal numbers, which are distinct entities, of which the former are simpler, but of 
which both are essential to ordinary Mathematics. On Ordinal numbers, cf. Chaps, 
xxix, xxxvm, infra. 

+ See Peano, F. 1901, p. 6 ff. and Padoa, “The'orie Alftebrique des Nombres 
Entiers,” Congrh, Vol. hi, p. 314 ff. 



112 


Number 


[chap, xi 

rule, determinate when their constituents are given, but are themselves 
new entities (which may be in some sense simple), defined, in the 
mathematical sense, bv certain relations to their constituents. I shall, 
therefore, in future, ignore the philosophical sense, and speak only of 
mathematical definability. I shall, however, restrict this notion more 
than is done by Professor Peano and his disciples. They hold that the 
various branches of Mathematics have various indefinables, bv means of 
which the remaining ideas of the said subjects are defined. I hold — 
and it is an important part of my purpose to prove — that all Pure 
Mathematics (including Geometry and even rational Dynamics) contains 
only one set of indefinables, namely the fundamental logical concepts 
discussed in Part I. When the various logical constants have been 
enumerated, it is somewhat arbitrary which of them we regard as 
indefinable, though there are apparently some which must be indefinable 
in any theory. But my contention is, that the indefinables of Pure 
Mathematics are all of this kind, and that the presence of any other 
indefinables indicates that our subject belongs to Applied Mathematics. 
Moreover, of the three kinds of definition admitted by Peano — the 
nominal definition, the definition by postulates, and the definition by 
abstraction* — I recognize only the nominal : the others, it would seem, 
are only necessitated by Peano’s refusal to regard relations as part of the 
fundamental apparatus of logic, and by his somewhat undue haste in 
regarding as an individual what is really a class. These remarks will be 
best explained by considering their application to the definition of 
cardinal numbers. 

109. It has been common in the past, among those who regarded 
numbers fis definable, to make an exception as regards the number 1, 
and to define the remainder by its means. Thus 2 was 1 + 1, 8 was 
2 + 1, and so on. This method was only applicable to finite numbers, 
and made a tiresome difference between 1 and other numbers ; moreover 
the meaning of 4- was commonly not explained. We are able nowa- 
days to improve greatly upon this method. In the first place, since 
Cantor has shown how to deal w r ith the infinite, it has become both 
desirable and possible to deal with the fundamental properties of numbers 
in a way which is equally applicable to finite and infinite numbers. In 
the second place, the logical calculus has enabled us to give an exact 
definition of arithmetical addition ; and in the third place, it has become 
as easy to define 0 and 1 as to define any other number. In order to 
explain how this is done, I shall first set forth the definition of numbers 
by abstraction ; I shall then point out formal defects in this definition, 
and replace it by a nominal definition. 

Numbers are, it will be admitted, applicable essentially to classes. 
It is true that, where the number is finite, individuals may be enumerated 

* Cf. Burali-Forti, “Sur les differentes definitions du nombre reel,” Congrea, in, 
p. 294 ff. 



113 


108, 109] Definition of Cardinal Numbers 

to make up the given number, and may be counted one by one without 
any mention of a class-concept. But all finite collections of individuals 
form classes, so that what results is after all the number of a class. 
And where the number is infinite, the individuals cannot be enumerated, 
but must be defined by intension, i.e. by some common property in 
virtue of which they form a class. Thus when any class-concept is 
given, there is a certain number of individuals to which this class-concept 
is applicable, and the number may therefore l>e regarded as a property 
of the class. It is this view of numbers which has rendered possible the 
whole theory of infinity, since it relieves us of the necessity of enume- 
rating the individuals whose number is to be considered. This view 
depends fundamentally upon the notion of all , the numerical conjunction 
as we agreed to call it (§ 59)! All men, for example, denotes men con- 
joined in a certain way ; and it is as thus denoted that they have a 
number. Similarly all number s or all points denotes numbers or points 
conjoined in a certain way, and as thus conjoined numbers or points have 
a number. Numbers, then, are to be regarded as properties of classes. 

The next question is : Under what circumstances do two classes have 
the same number ? The answer is, that they have the same number 
when their terms can be correlated one to one, so that any one term of 
either corresponds to one and only one term of the other. This requires 
that there should lx* some one-one relation whose domain is the one 
class and whose converse domain is the other class. Thus, for example, 
if in a community all the men and all the women are married, and 
polygamy and polyandry are forbidden, the number of men must be the 
same as the number of women. It might be thought that a one-one 
relation could not be defined except by reference to the number 1. But 
this is not the case. A relation is one-one when, if x and x have the 
relation in question to y, then x and x are identical ; while if x has the 
relation in question to y and y, then y and y are identical. Thus it is 
possible, without the notion of unity, to define what is meant by a one- 
one relation. But in order to provide for the case of two classes which 
have no terms, it is necessary to modify slightly the above account of 
what is meant by saying that two classes have the same number, tor if 
there are no terms, the terms cannot be correlated one to one. We 
must say: Two classes have the same number when, and only when, there 
is a one-one relation whose domain includes the one class, and which is 
such that the class of correlates of the terms of the one class is identical 
with the other class. From this it appears that two classes having no 
terms have always the same number of terms ; for if we take any one- 
one relation whatever, its domain includes the null-class, and the class 
of correlates of the null-class is again the null-class. When two classes 
have the same number, they are said to be similar . 

Some readers may suppose that a definition of what is meant by 
saying that two classes have the same number is wholly unnecessary. 



114 


Number 


[chap, xi 

The way to find out, they may say, is to count both classes. It is such 
notions as this which have, until very recently, prevented the exhibition 
of Arithmetic as a branch of Pure Logic. For the question immediately 
arises : What is meant by counting ? To this question we usually get 
only some irrelevant psychological answer, as, that counting consists in 
successive acts of attention. In order to count 10, I suppose that ten 
acts of attention are required : certainly a most useful definition of the 
number 10 ! Counting has, in fact, a good meaning, which is not 
psychological. But this meaning is highly complex ; it is only applicable 
to classes which can be well-ordered, which are not known to be all 
classes ; and it only gives the number of the class when this number is 
finite— a rare and exceptional case. We must not, therefore, bring in 
counting where the definition of numbers is in question. 

The relation of similarity between classes has the three properties of 
being reflexive, symmetrical, and transitive ; that is to say, if w, r, w be 
classes, u is similar to itself ; if u be similar to v , v is similar to u ; and 
if u be similar to v 9 and v to w, then u is similar to w. These properties 
all follow easily from the definition. Now these three properties of a 
relation are held by Peano and common sense to indicate that when the 
relation holds between two terms, those two terms have a certain common 
property, and vice versa. This common property we call their number*. 
This is the definition of numbers by abstraction. 

110 . Now this definition by abstraction, and generally the process 
employed in such definitions, suffers from an absolutely fatal formal 
defect: it does not show that only one object satisfies the definition f. 
Thus instead of obtaining one common property of similar classes, which 
is the number of the classes in question, we obtain a class of such 
properties, with no means of deciding how many terms this class contains. 
In order to make this point clear, let us examine what is meant, in the 
present instance, by a common property. What is meant is, that any 
class has to a certain entity, its number, a relation which it has to nothing 
else, but which all similar classes (and no other entities) have to the said 
number. That is, there is a many -one relation which every class has to 
its number and to nothing else. Thus, so far as the definition by 
abstraction can show, any set of entities to each of which some class has 
a certain many-one relation, and to one and only one of which any given 
class has this relation, and which are such that all classes similar to a 
given class have this relation to one and the same entity of the set, 
appear as the set of numbers, and any entity of this set is the number of 
some class. If, then, there are many such sets of entities — and it is easy 

* Cf. Peano, F. 1901, § 32, 0, Note. 

t On the necessity of this condition, cf. Padoa, loc. cit ., p. 324. Padoa appears 
not to perceive, however, that all definitions define the single individual of a class : 
when what is defined is a class, this must he the only term of some class of classes. 



115 


109 - 111 ] Definition of Cardinal Numbers 

to prove that there are an infinite number of them — every class will 
have many numbers, and the definition wholly fails to define the number 
of a class. This argument is perfectly general, and shows that definition 
by abstraction is never a logically valid process. 

111 . There are two ways in which we may attempt to remedy this 
defect. One of these consists in defining as the number of a class the 
whole class of entities, chosen one from each of the above sets of entities, 
to which all classes similar to the given class (and no others) have some 
many-one relation or other, but this method is practically useless, since 
all entities, without exception, belong to every such class, so that every 
class will have as its number the class of all entities of every sort and 
description. The other remedy is more practicable, and applies to all 
the cases in which lVano employs definition by abstraction. This 
method is, to define as the number of a class the class of all classes 
similar to the given class. Membership of this class of classes (considered 
as a predicate) is a common property of all the similar classes and of no 
others; moreover every class of the set of similar classes has to the set 
a relation which it has to nothing else, and which every class has to its 
own set. Thus the conditions are completely fulfilled by this class of 
classes, anti it has the merit of being determinate when a class is given, 
and of being different for two classes which are not similar. This, then, 
is an irreproachable definition of the number of a class in purely logical 
terms. 

To regard a number as a class of classes must appear, at first sight, 
a wholly indefensible paradox. Thus Peano (F. 1901, §92) remarks that 
“ we cannot identify the number of fa class] a with the class of classes in 
question f i.e. the class of classes similar to a], for these objects have 
different properties." He does not tell us what these properties are, and 
for my part I am unable to discover them. Probably it appeared to him 
immediately evident that a number is not a class of classes. But some- 
thing may be said to mitigate the appearance of paradox in this view. 
In the first place, such a word as couple or trio obviously does denote a 
class of classes. Thus what we have to say is, for example, that “ two 
men" means “logical product of class of men and couple," and “there are 
two men" means “there is a class of men which is also a couple." In the 
second place, when we remember that a class-concept is not itself a col- 
lection, but a property by w hich a collection is defined, we see that, if we 
define the number as the class -concept, not the class, a number is really 
defined as a common property of a set of similar classes and of nothing 
else. This view removes the appearance of paradox to a great degree. 
There is, however, a philosophical difficulty in this view, and generally in 
the connection of classes and predicates. It may be that there are many 
predicates common to a certain collection of objects and to no others. In 
this case, these predicates are all regarded by Symbolic Logic as equivalent, 
and any one of them is said to be equal to any other. Thus if the 



116 


Number 


[chap, xi 

predicate were defined by the collection of objects, we should not obtain, 
in general, a single predicate, but a class of predicates; for this class of 
predicates we should require a new class-concept, and so on. The only 
available class-concept would be “predictability of the given collection of 
terms and of no others.’ 1 But in the present case, where the collection is 
defined by a certain relation to one of its terms, there is some danger of 
a logical error. Let u be a class; then the number of u y we said, is the 
class of classes similar to u. But “similar to it” cannot be the actual 
concept which constitutes the number of u ; for, if v be similar to u y 
“similar to v 11 defines the same class, although it is a different concept. 
Thus we require, as the defining predicate of the class of similar classes, 
some concept which does not have any special relation to one or more of 
the constituent classes. In regard to every particular number that may 
be mentioned, whether finite or infinite, such a predicate is, as a matter 
of fact, discoverable; but when all we are told about a number is that it 
is the number of some class ?/, it is natural that a special reference to u 
should appear in the definition. This, however, is not the point at issue. 
The real point is, that what is defined is the same whether we use the 
predicate “similar to u™ or “similar to v” provided v is similar to v. 
This shows that it is not the class-concept or defining predicate that is 
defined, but the class itself whose terms are the various classes which are 
similar to u or to v. It is such classes, therefore, and not predicates such 
as “similar to /V’that must be taken to constitute numbers. 

Thus, to sum up: Mathematically, a number is nothing but a class of 
similar classes: this definition allows the deduction of all the usual 
properties of numbers, whether finite or infinite, and is the only one (so 
far as 1 know) which is possible in terms of the fundamental concepts of 
general logic. But philosophically we may admit that every collection 
of similar classes has some common predicate applicable to no entities 
except the classes in question, and if we can find, by inspection, that 
there is a certain class of such common predicates, of which one and only 
one applies to each collection of similar classes, then we may, if we see 
fit, call this particular class of predicates the class of numbers. For my 
part, I do not know whether there is any such class of predicates, and 
I do know that, if there be such a class, it is wholly irrelevant to Ma- 
thematics. Wherever Mathematics derives a common property from a 
reflexive, symmetrical, and transitive relation, all mathematical purposes 
of the supposed common property are completely served when it is 
replaced by the class of terms having the given relation to a given term; 
and this is precisely the case presented by cardinal numbers. For the 
future, therefore, I shall adhere to the above definition, since it is at 
once precise and adequate to all mathematical uses. 



CHAPTER XII. 


ADDITION AND MULTIPLICATION. 

112. In most mathematical accounts of arithmetical operations we 
find the error of endeavouring to give at once a definition which shall be 
applicable to rationals, or even to real numbers, without dwelling at 
sufficient length upon the theory of integers. For the present, integers 
alone will occupv us. The definition of integers, given in the preceding 
chapter, obviously does not admit of extension to fractions; and in fact 
the absolute difference between integers and fractions, even between 
integers and fractions whose denominator is unity, cannot possibly be too 
strongly emphasized. What rational fractions are, and what real numbers 
are, I shall endeavour to explain at a later stage; positive and negative 
numbers also are at present excluded. The integers with which we are 
now concerned are not positive, but signless. And so the addition and 
multiplication to be defined in this chapter are only applicable to integers; 
but they have the merit of being equally applicable to finite and infinite 
integers. Indeed, for the present, I shall rigidly exclude all propositions 
which involve either the finitude or the infinity of the numbers considered. 

113. There is only one fundamental kind of addition, namely the 
logical kind. All other kinds can be defined in terms of this and logical 
multiplication. In the present chapter the addition of integers is to be 
defined by its means. Logical addition, as was explained in Part I, 
is the same as disjunction; if p and q are propositions, their logical 
sum is the proposition “/> or q," and if u and v are classes, their 
logical sum is the class “ u or r,” i.e. the class to which belongs every 
term which either Wongs to u or belongs to v. The logical sum 
of two classes w and v may be defined in terms of the logical product 
of two propositions, as the class of terms belonging to every’ class 
in which both u and v are contained*. This definition is not essen- 
tially confined to two classes, but may be extended to a class of 
classes, whether finite or infinite. Thus if & be a class of classes, the 
logical sum of the classes composing k (called for short the sum of k) is 


* F. 1901, § 2, Prop. 1 •0. . 



118 


Number 


[chap, xn 

the class of terms belonging to every class which contains every class 
which is a term of At. It is this notion which underlies arithmetical 
addition. If A; be a class of classes no two of which have any common 
terms (called for short an exclusive class of classes), then the arith- 
metical sum of the numbers of the various classes of k is the number of 
terms in the logical sum of k. This definition is absolutely general, and 
applies equally whether k or any of its constituent classes be finite 
or infinite. In order to assure ourselves that the resulting number 
depends only upon the numbers of the various classes belonging to At, and 
not upon the particular class k that happens to be chosen, it is necessary 
to prove (as is easily done) that if At' be another exclusive class of classes, 
similar to At, and every member of k is similar to its correlate in At', and 
vwe versa , then the number of terms in the sum of At is the same as the 
number in the sum of At'. Thus, for example, suppose At has only two 
terms, u and v , and suppose u and v have no common part. Then the 
number of terms in the logical sum of n and v is the sum of the number 
of terms in u and in v\ and if u be similar to u 9 and v to v , and ?/', v 
have no common part, then the sum of 11 and v is similar to the 
sum of u and v. 

114. With regard to this definition of a sum of numbers, it is to be 
observed that it cannot be freed from reference to classes which have the 
numbers in question. The number obtained by summation is essentially 
the number of the logical sum of a certain class of classes or of some 
similar class of similar classes. The necessity of this reference to classes 
emerges when one number occurs twice or oftener in the summation. It 
is to be observed that the numbers concerned have no order of summation, 
so that we have no such proposition as the commutative law : this pro- 
position, as introduced in Arithmetic, results only from a defective 
symbolism, which causes an order among the symbols which has no 
correlative order in what is symbolized. But owing to the absence of 
order, if one number occurs twice in a summation, we cannot distinguish 
a first and a second occurrence of the said number. If we exclude a 
reference to classes which have the said number, there is no sense in the 
supposition of its occurring twice : the summation of a class of numbers 
can be defined, but in that case, no number can be repeated. In the 
above definition of a sum, the numbers concerned are defined as the 
numbers of certain classes, and therefore it is not necessary to decide 
whether any number is repeated or not. But in order to define, without 
reference to particular classes, a sum of numbers of which some are 
repeated, it is necessary first to define multiplication. 

This point may be made clearer by considering a special case, such as 
1 + 1. It is plain that we cannot take the number 1 itself twice over, 
for there is one number 1, and there are not two instances of it. And if 
the logical addition of 1 to itself were in question, w'e should find that 
1 and 1 is 1, according to the general principle of Symbolic Logic. Nor 



113 - 116 ] Addition and Multiplication 119 

can we define 1 + 1 as the arithmetical sum of a certain class of numbers. 
This method can be employed as regards 1 + 2, or any sum in which no 
number is repeated; but as regards 1 + 1, the only class of numbers 
involved is the class whose only member is 1, and since this class has one 
member, not two, we cannot define 1+1 by its means. Thus the full 
definition of 1 + 1 is as follows : 1+1 is the number of a class w which 
is the logical sum of two classes u and v which have no common term 
and have each only one term. The chief point to be observed is, that 
logical addition of classes is the fundamental notion, while the arith- 
metical addition of numbers is wholly subsequent. 

116 . The general definition of multiplication is due to Mr A. N. 
Whitehead*. It is as follows. Let A; be a class of classes, no two of 
which have any term in common. Form what is called the multiplicative 
class of A:, i.e. the class each of whose terms is a class formed by choosing 
one and only one term from each of the classes belonging to k. Then 
the number of terms in the multiplicative class of k is the product of all 
the numbers of the various classes composing k. This definition, like 
that of addition given above, has two merits, which make it preferable 
to any other hitherto suggested. In the first place, it introduces no 
order among the numbers multiplied, so that there is no need of the 
commutative law, which, here as in the case of addition, is concerned 
rather with the symbols than with what is symbolized. In the second 
place, the above definition does not require us to decide, concerning any 
of the numbers involved, whether they are finite or infinite. Cantor has 
given f definitions of the sum and product of tzvo numbers, which do not 
require a decision as to whether these numbers are finite or infinite. 
These definitions can be extended to the sum and product of any finite 
number of finite or infinite numbers ; but they do not, as they stand, 
allow the definition of the sum or product of an infinite number of 
numbers. This grave defect is remedied in the above definitions, which 
enable us to pursue Arithmetic, as it ought to be pursued, without 
introducing the distinction of finite and infinite until we wish to study 
it. Cantor’s definitions have also the formal defect of introducing an 
order among the numbers summed or multiplied : but this is, in his 
case, a mere defect in the symbols chosen, not in the ideas which he 
symbolizes. Moreover it is not practically desirable, in the case of the 
sum or product of two numbers, to avoid this formal defect, since the 
resulting cumbrousness becomes intolerable. 

116 . It is easy to deduce from the above definitions the usual 
connection of addition and multiplication, which may be thus stated. 
If A: be a class of b mutually exclusive classes, each of which contains 
a terms, then the logical sum of k contains a x b termsj. It is also 


* American Journal of Mathematic s } Oct. 1902. 

t Math. Annalen, Vol. xlvi, §3. + See Whitehead, loc. cit . 



120 


Number 


[chap. XII 

easy to obtain the definition of a 6 , and to prove the associative and dis- 
tributive laws, and the formal laws for powers, such as a b <rf = a b+e . But 
it is to be observed that exponentiation is not to be regarded as a new 
independent operation, since it is merely an application of multipli- 
cation. It is true that exponentiation can be independently defined, 
as is done by Cantor*, but there is no advantage in so doing. Moreover 
exponentiation unavoidably introduces ordinal notions, since a b is not in 
general equal to b a . For this reason we cannot define the result of an 
infinite number of exponentiations. Powers, therefore, are to be regarded 
simply as abbreviations for products in which all the numbers multiplied 
together are equal. 

From the data which we now possess, all those propositions which 
hold equally of finite and infinite numbers can be deduced. The next 
step, therefore, is to consider the distinction between the finite and the 
infinite. 



CHAPTER XIII. 


FINITE ANI) INFINITE. 

117. The purpose of the present chapter is not to discuss the philo- 
sophical difficulties concerning the infinite, which are postponed to 
Part V. For the present I wish merely to set forth briefly the mathe- 
matical theory of finite and infinite as it appears in the theory of 
cardinal numbers. This is its most fundamental form, and must be 
understood before the ordinal infinite can be adequately explained*. 

Let v be any class, and let u be a class formed by taking away one 
term x from u. Then it may or may not happen that u is similar to u. 
For example, if u be the class of all finite numliers, and «' the class of 
all finite numbers except 0, the terms of it' are obtained by adding 1 to each 
of the terms of «, and this correlates one term of u with one of v and vice 
verm , no term of either being omitted or taken twice over. Thus n is 
similar to n. But if u consists of all finite numbers up to «, where n is 
some finite number, and u consists of all these except 0, then u is not 
similar to u. If there is one term x which can lx 1 taken away from u to 
leave a similar class u, it is easily proved that if any other term y is 
taken away instead of x we also get a class similar to w. When it is 
possible to take away one term from u and leave a class u similar to «, 
we say that u is an infinite class. When this is not possible, we say that 
u is & finite class. From these definitions it follows that the null-class is 
finite, since no term can be taken from it. It is also easy to prove that 
if u be a finite class, the class formed by adding one term to n is finite ; 
and conversely if this class is finite, so is u. It follows from the definition 
that the numbers of finite classes other than the null-class are altered 
by subtracting 1, while those of infinite classes are unaltered by this 
operation. It is easy to prove that the same holds of the addition of 1. 

118. Among finite classes, if one is a proper part of another, the 
one has a smaller number of terms than the other. (A proper part is 
a part not the whole.) But among infinite classes, this no longer holds. 

* On the present topic c f. Cantor, Math. Annalen, Vol. xivi, §§ •'», <5, where 
most of what follows will be found. 



122 


Number 


[chap, xm 


This distinction is, in fact, an essential part of the above definitions of 
the finite and the infinite. Of two infinite classes, one may have a 
greater or a smaller number of terms than the other. A class u is said 
to be greater than a class v 9 or to have a number greater than that of v , 
when the two are not similar, but v is similar to a proper part of u . It 
is known that if u is similar to a proper part of t>, and v to a proper 
part of u (a case which can only arise when u and v are infinite), then u 
is similar to v ; hence “ u is greater than v v is inconsistent with “v is 
greater than u” It is not at present known whether, of two different 
infinite numbers, one must be greater and the other less. But it is known 
that there is a least infinite number, i.e. a number which is less than any 
different infinite number. This is the number of finite integers, which 
will be denoted, in the present work, by a 0 *. This number is capable of 
several definitions in which no mention is made of the finite numbers. In 
the first place it may be defined (as is implicitly done by Can tor f) by means 
of the principle of mathematical induction. This definition is as follows: 
Oq is the number of any class u which is the domain of a one-one relation 
if, whose converse domain is contained in but not coextensive with w, 
and which is such that, calling the term to which x has the relation R 
the successor of <r, if ,v be any class to which belongs a term of u which is 
not a successor of any other term of ?/, and to which belongs the successor 
of every term of u which belongs to .v, then every term of u belongs to .v. 
Or again, we may define a n as follows. Let P be a transitive and asym- 
metrical relation, and let any two different terms of the field of P have the 
relation P or its converse. Further let any class u contained in the field 
of P and having successors (i.e. terms to which every term of u has the 
relation P) have an immediate successor, i.e. a term whose predecessors 
either belong to u or precede some term of u ; let there be one term of 
the field of P which has no predecessors, but let every term which has 
predecessors have successors and also have an immediate predecessor ; 
then the number of terms in the field of P is a 0 . Other definitions may 
be suggested, but as all are equivalent it is not necessary to multiply 
them. The following characteristic is important : Every class whose 
number is a 0 can be arranged in a series having consecutive terms, a 
beginning but no end, and such that the number of predecessors of any 
term of the series is finite ; and any series having these characteristics 
has the number or 0 . 

It is very easy to show that every infinite class contains classes whose 
number is cr 0 . For let u be such a class, and let x 0 be a term of u . 
Then u is similar to the class obtained by taking away x 0 , wdiich we will 
call the class ?/,. Thus m, is an infinite class. From this we can take 


* Cantor employs for this number the Hebrew Aleph with the suffix 0, but this 
notation is inconvenient. 

t Math. Annaleiiy Vol. xlvi, § 6. 



123 


118, 119] Finite and Infinite 

away a term x l9 leaving an infinite class and so on. The series of 
terms x 19 x,,... is contained in u } and is of the type which has the 
number ar 0 . From this point we can advance to an alternative definition 
of the finite and the infinite by means of mathematical induction, which 
must now be explained. 

119. If ro be any finite number, the number obtained by adding 
1 to n is also finite, and is different from n. Thus beginning with 0 
we can form a series of numbers by successive additions of 1. We 
may define finite numbers, if we choose, as those numbers that can be 
obtained from 0 by such steps, and that obey mathematical induction. 
That is, the class of finite numbers is the class of numbers which is 
contained in every class s to which belongs 0 and the successor of every 
number belonging to where the successor of a number is the number 
obtained by adding 1 to the given number. Now a 0 is not such a 
number, since, in virtue of propositions already proved, no such number 
is similar to a part of itself. Hence also no number greater than ot 0 
is finite according to the new definition. But it i* easy to prove that 
every number less than ar 0 is finite with the new definition as with the 
old. Hence the two definitions are equivalent. Thus we may define 
finite numbers either as those that can be reached by mathematical 
induction, starting from 0 and increasing by 1 at each step, or as those 
of classes which are not similar to the parts of themselves obtained by 
taking away single terms. These two definitions art* both frequently 
employed, and it is important to realize that either is a consequence 
of the other. Both will occupy us much hereafter; for the present 
it is only intended, without controversy, to set forth the bare outlines 
of the mathematical theory of finite and infinite, leaving the details to 
be filled in during the course of the work. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THEORY OF FINITE NUMBERS. 


120. Having now clearly distinguished the finite from the infinite, 
we can devote ourselves to the consideration of finite numbers. It is 
customary, in the best treatises on the elements of Arithmetic*, not to 
define number or particular finite numbers, but to begin with certain 
axioms or primitive propositions, from which all the ordinary results 
are shown to follow. This method makes Arithmetic into an in- 
dependent study, instead of regarding it, as is done in the present 
work, as merely a development, without new axioms or indefinables, of a 
certain branch of general Logic. For this reason, the method in question 
seems to indicate a less degree of analysis than that adopted here. I 
shall nevertheless begin by an exposition of the more usual method, 
and then proceed to definitions and proofs of what are usually taken 
as indefinables and indemonstrables. For this purpose, I shall take 
Peano’s exposition in the Forrmdairc f, which is, so far as I know, 
the l>est from the point of view of accuracy and rigour. This exposition 
has the inestimable merit of showing that all Arithmetic can be de- 
veloped from three fundamental notions (in addition to those of general 
Logic) and five fundamental propositions concerning these notions. It 
proves also that, if the three notions be regarded as determined by the 
five propositions, these five propositions are mutally independent. This 
is shown by finding, for each set of four out of the five propositions, 
an interpretation which renders the remaining proposition false. It 
therefore only remains, in order to connect Peano’s theory with that 
here adopted, to give a definition of the three fundamental notions and 
a demonstration of the five fundamental propositions. When once this 
has been accomplished, we know with certainty that everything in the 
theory of finite integers follows. 

* Except Frege’s Grand genetze der Arithmetik (Jena, 1893). 

t F. 1901, Part II and F. 1899, § 20 ff. F. 1901 differs from earlier editions in 
making “ number is a class” a primitive proposition. I regard this as unnecessary, 
since it is implied by “0 is a number.” I therefore follow the earlier editions. 



120 - 122 ] Theory of Finite Numbers 125 

Peano’s three indefinables are 0, finite integer *, and successor of. 
It is assumed, as part of the idea of succession (though it would, 

I think, be better to state it as a separate axiom), that every number 
has one and only one successor. (By successor is meant, of course, 
immediate successor.) Peano’s primitive propositions are then the 
following. (1) 0 is a number. (2) If a is a number, the successor of 
a is a number. (3) If two numbers have the same successor, the two 
numbers are identical. (4) 0 is not the successor of any number. 
(5) If s be a class to which belongs 0 and also the successor of every 
number belonging to a, then every number belongs to s. The last of 
these propositions is the principle of mathematical induction. 

121 . The mutual independence of these five propositions has been 
demonstrated by Peano and Padoa as follows*)". (1) Giving the usual 
meanings to 0 and successor , but denoting bv number finite integers 
other than 0, all the above propositions except the first are true. 

(2) Giving the usual meanings to 0 and successor , but, denoting by 
number only finite integers less than 10, or less than any other specified 
finite integer, all the above propositions are true except the second. 

(3) A series which begins by an antiperiod and then becomes periodic 
(for example, the digits in a decimal which becomes recurring after a 
certain number of places) will satisfy all the above propositions except 
the third. (4) A periodic series (such as the hours on the clock) 
satisfies all except the fourth of the primitive propositions. (5) Giving 
to successor the meaning greater by 2, so that the successor of 0 is 2, 
and of 2 is 4, and so on, all the primitive propositions are satisfied 
except the fifth, which is not satisfied if s be the class of even numbers 
including 0. Thus no one of the five primitive propositions can be 
deduced from the other four. 

122 . Peano points out ( loc . cit.) that other classes besides that of 
the finite integers satisfy the above five propositions. What he says 
is as follows : “There is an infinity of systems satisfying all the primitive 
propositions. They are all verified, e.g ., by replacing number and 0 by 
number other than 0 and 1. All the systems which satisfy the primitive 
propositions have a one-one correspondence with the numbers. Number 
is what is obtained from all these systems by abstraction ; in other 
words, number is the system which has all the properties enunciated 
in the primitive propositions, and those only.' 1 This observation appears 
to me lacking in logical correctness. In the first place, the question 
arises : How are the various systems distinguished, which agree in satis- 
fying the primitive propositions ? How, for example, is the system 
beginning with 1 distinguished from that beginning with 0 ? To this 

* Throughout the rest of this chapter, 1 shall use number as synonymous with 
finite integer . 

+ F. 181)9, p. 30. 



126 


Number 


[chap, xiv 


question two different answers may be given. We may say that 0 and 
1 are both primitive ideas, or at least that 0 is so, and that therefore 
0 and 1 can be intrinsically distinguished, as yellow and blue are dis- 
tinguished. But if we take this view — which, by the way, will have to 
be extended to the other primitive ideas, number and succession — we 
shall have to say that these three notions are what I call constants, 
and that there is no need of any such process of abstraction as Peano 
speaks of in the definition of number. In this method, 0, number, and 
succession appear, like other indefinables, as ideas which must be simply 
recognized. Their recognition yields what mathematicians call the 
existence-theorem, i.e. it assures us that there really are numbers. 
But this process leaves it doubtful whether numbers are logical constants 
or not, and therefore makes Arithmetic, according to the definition in 
Part I, Chapter i, prbna facie a branch of Applied Mathematics. More- 
over it is evidently not the process which Peano has in mind. The 
other answer to the question consists in regarding 0, number, and 
succession as a class of three ideas belonging to a certain class of trios 
defined by the five primitive propositions. It is very easy so to state 
the matter that the five primitive propositions become transformed into 
the nominal definition of a certain class of trios. There are then no 
longer any indefinables or indemonstrables in our theory, which has 
become a pure piece of Logic. But 0, number and succession become 
variables, since they are only determined as one of the class of trios : 
moreover the existence-theorem now becomes doubtful, since we cannot 
know, except by the discovery of at least one actual trio of this class, 
that there are any such trios at all. One actual trio, however, would 
be a constant, and thus we require some method of giving constant 
values to 0, number, and succession. What we can show is that, if there 
is one such trio, there are an infinite number of them. For by striking 
out the first term from any class satisfying the conditions laid down 
concerning number, we always obtain a class which again satisfies the 
conditions in question. But even this statement, since the meaning of 
number is still in question, must be differently worded if circularity 
is to l>e avoided. Moreover we must ask ourselves: Is any process of 
abstraction from all systems satisfying the five axioms, such as Peano 
contemplates, logically possible ? Every term of a class is the term it 
is, and satisfies some proposition which becomes false when another term 
of the class is substituted. There is therefore no term of a class which 
has merely the properties defining the class and no others. What 
Peano’s process of abstraction really amounts to is the consideration of 
the class and variable members of it, to the exclusion of constant 
members. For only a variable member of the class will have only the 
properties by which the class is defined. Thus Peano does not succeed 
in indicating any constant meaning for 0, number, and succession, nor 
in showing that any constant meaning is possible, since the existence- 



127 


122, 123] Theory of Finite Numbers 

theorem is not proved. His only method, therefore, is to say that at 
least one such constant meaning can be immediately perceived, but is 
not definable. This method is not logically unsound, but it is wholly 
different from the impossible abstraction which he suggests. And the 
proof of the mutual independence of his five primitive propositions is 
only necessary in order to show that the definition of the class of trios 
determined by them is not redundant. Redundancy is not a logical 
error, but merely a defect of what may be called style. My object, in 
the above account of cardinal numbers, has been to prove, from general 
Logic, that there is one constant meaning which satisfies the above five 
propositions, and that this constant meaning should be called number, 
or rather finite cardinal number. And in this way, new indefinables 
and indemonstrables are wholly avoided ; for when we have shown that 
the class of trios in question has at least one member, and when this 
member has been used to define number, we easily show that the class 
of trios has an infinite number of members, and wc define the class 
by means of the five properties enumerated in Peano’s primitive proposi- 
tions. For the comprehension of the connection between Mathematics 
and Logic, this point is of very great importance, and similar points will 
occur constantly throughout the present work. 

123. In order to bring out more clearly the difference between 
Peano’s procedure and mine, I shall here repeat the definition of the 
class satisfying his five primitive propositions, the definition of finite 
number , and the proof, in the case of finite numbers, of his five primitive 
propositions. 

The class of classes satisfying his axioms is the same as the class of 
classes whose cardinal number is a i.e. the class of classes, according to 
my theory, which is a 0 . It is most simply defined as follows : a 0 is the 
class of classes u each of which is the domain of some one-one relation R 
(the relation of a term to its successor) which is such that there is at 
least one term which succeeds no other term, every term which succeeds 
has a successor, and u is contained in any class 8 which contains a term 
of u having no predecessors, and also contains the successor of every 
term of u which belongs to s. This definition includes Peano’s five 
primitive propositions and no more. Thus of every such class all the 
usual propositions in the arithmetic of finite numbers can be proved : 
addition, multiplication, fractions, etc. can be defined, and the whole of 
analysis can be developed, in so far as complex numbers are not involved. 
But in this whole development, the meaning of the entities and relations 
which occur is to a certain degree indeterminate, since the entities and 
the relation with which we start are variable members of a certain class. 
Moreover, in this whole development, nothing shows that there are such 
classes as the definition speaks of. 

In the logical theory of cardinals, we start from the opposite end. 
We first define a certain class of entities, and then show that this class 



128 


Number 


[chap, xiv 

of entities belongs to the class «<, above defined. This is done as follows. 
(1) 0 is the class of classes whose only member is the null-class. (2) A 
number is the class of all classes similar to any one of themselves. (3) 1 is 
the class of all classes which are not null and are such that, if x belongs to 
the class, the class without x is the null -class ; or such that, if x and y 
belong to the class, then x and y are identical. (4) Having shown that 
if two classes be similar, and a class of one term be added to each, the 
sums are similar, we define that, if n be a number, n + 1 is the number 
resulting from adding a unit to a class of n terms. (5) Finite numbers 
are those belonging to every class a to which belongs 0, and to which 
n 4- 1 belongs if n belongs. This completes the definition of finite 
numbers. We then have, as regards the five propositions which Peano 
assumes : (1) 0 is a number. (2) Meaning n + 1 by the successor of w, 
if n be a number, then n + 1 is a number. (8) If n -t 1 = m + 1, then 
n = rn. (4) If n be any number, n + 1 is different from 0. (5) If ,y be 

a class, and 0 belongs to this class, and if when n belongs to it, n + 1 
belongs to it, then all finite numbers belong to it. Thus all the five 
essential properties arc satisfied by the class of finite .numbers as above 
defined. Hence the class of classes or 0 has members, and the class jimte 
number is one definite member of a 0 . There is, therefore, from the 
mathematical standpoint, no need whatever of new indefinables or 
indemonstrables in the whole of Arithmetic and Analysis. 



CHAPTEU XV. 


ADDITION OF TERMS AND ADDITION OF C LASSES. 

124. Having now briefly set forth the mathematical theory of 
cardinal numbers, it is time to turn our attention to the philosophical 
questions raised by this theory. I shall begin by a few preliminary 
remarks as to the distinction between philosophy and mathematics, and 
as to the function of philosophy in such a subject as the foundations of 
mathematics. The following observations are not necessarily to be 
regarded as applicable to other branches of philosophy, since they are 
derived specially from the consideration of the problems of logic. 

The distinction of philosophy and mathematics is broadly one of 
point of view : mathematics is constructive and deductive, philosophy is 
critical, and in a certain impersonal sense controversial. Wherever we 
have deductive reasoning, we have mathematics ; but the principles of 
deduction, the recognition of indefinable entities, and the distinguishing 
between such entities, are the business of philosophy. Philosophy is, in 
fact, mainly a question of insight and perception. Entities which are 
perceived by the so-called senses, such as colours and sounds, are, for 
some reason, not commonly regarded as coming within the scope of 
philosophy, except as regards the more abstract of their relations ; but 
it seems highly doubtful whether any such exclusion can be maintained. 
In any case, however, since the present work is essentially unconcerned 
with sensible objects, we may confine our remarks to entities which are 
not regarded as existing in space and time. Such entities, if we are to 
know anything about them, must be also in some sense perceived, and 
must be distinguished one from another ; their relations also must be 
in part immediately apprehended. A certain body of indefinable entities 
and indemonstrable propositions must form the starting-point for any 
mathematical reasoning ; and it is this starting-point that concerns the 
philosopher. When the philosopher’s work has been perfectly accom- 
plished, its results can be wholly embodied in premisses from which 
deduction may proceed. Now it follows from the very nature of such 
inquiries that results may be disproved, but can never be proved. The 
disproof will consist in pointing out contradictions and inconsistencies ; 



130 


Number 


[chap, xv 

but the absence of these can never amount to proof. All depends, in 
the end, upon immediate perception ; and philosophical argument, 
strictly speaking, consists mainly of an endeavour to cause the reader to 
perceive what has been perceived by the author. The argument, in 
short, is not of the nature of proof, but of exhortation. Thus the 
question of the present chapter : Is there any indefinable set of entities 
commonly called numbers, and different from the set of entities above 
defined ? is an essentially philosophical question, to be settled by in- 
spection rather than by accurate chains of reasoning. 

125. In the present chapter, we shall examine the question whether 
the above definition of cardinal numbers in any way presupposes some 
more fundamental sense of number. There are several ways in which 
this may be supposed to be the case. In the first place, the individuals 
which compose classes seem to be each in some sense one> and it might 
be thought that a one-one relation could not be defined without in- 
troducing the number 1. In the second place, it may very well be 
questioned whether a class which has only one term can be distinguished 
from that one term. And in the third place, it may be held that the 
notion of class presupposes number in a sense different from that above 
defined : it may be maintained that classes arise from the addition of 
individuals, as indicated by the word awl , and that the logical addition 
of classes is subsequent to this addition of individuals. These questions 
demand a new inquiry into the meaning of one and of class, and here, 
I hope, we shall find ourselves aided by the theories set forth in Part I. 

As regards the fact that any individual or term is in some sense one, 
this is of course undeniable. But it does not follow that the notion of 
one is presupposed when individuals are spoken of: it may be, on the 
contrary, that the notion of term or individual is the fundamental one, 
from which that of one is derived. This view was adopted in Part I, 
and there seems no reason to reject it. And as for one-one relations, 
they are defined by means of identity, without any mention of one , as 
follows : R is a one-one relation if, when x and x' have the relation R to 
y, and x has the relation R to y and y , then x and x are identical, and 
so are y and y'. It is true that here x y y, .r', y are each one term, but 
this is not (it would seem) in any way presupposed in the definition. 
This disposes (pending a new inquiry into the nature of classes) of the 
first of the above objections. 

The next question is as to the distinction between a class containing 
only one member, and the one member which it contains. If we could 
identify a class with its defining predicate or class-concept, no difficulty 
would arise on this point. When a certain predicate attaches to one 
and only one term, it is plain that that term is not identical with the 
predicate in question. But if two predicates attach to precisely the 
same terms, we should say that, although the predicates are different, 
the classes which they define are identical, i.e. there is only one class 



124-126] Addition of Terms and Addition of Classes 131 

which both define. If, for example, all featherless bipeds are men, and 
all men are featherless bipeds, the classes men and featherless bipeds are 
identical, though man differs from featherless Inped. This shows that a 
class cannot be identified with its class-concept or defining predicate. 
There might seem to be nothing left except the actual terms, so that 
when there is only one term, that term would have to be identical with 
the class. Yet for many formal reasons this view cannot give the 
meaning of the symbols which stand for classes in symbolic logic. For 
example, consider the class of numbers which, added to 3, give 5. This 
is a class containing no terms except the number 2. But we can say 
that 2 is a member of this class, i.e . it has to the class that peculiar 
indefinable relation which terms have to the classes they belong to. 
This seems to indicate that the class is different from the one term. 
The point is a prominent one in Peano’s Symbolic Logic, and is con- 
nected with his distinction between the relation of an individual to its 
class and the relation of a class to another in which it is contained. 
Thus the class of numbers which, added to 3, give 5, is contained in the 
class of numbers, but is not a number; whereas 2 is a number, but is 
not a class contained in the class of numbers. To identify the two 
relations which Peano distinguishes is to cause havoc in the theory of 
infinity, and to destroy the formal precision of many arguments and 
definitions. It seems, in fact, indubitable that Peano’s distinction is 
just, and that some way must be found of discriminating a term from 
a class containing that term only. 

126. In order to decide this point, it is necessary to pass to our 
third difficulty, and reconsider the notion of doss itself. This notion 
appears to be connected with the notion of denoting , explained in Part I, 
Chapter v. We there pointed out five ways of denoting, one of which 
we called the numerical conjunction. This was the kind indicated by all . 
This kind of conjunction appears to be that which is relevant in the 
case of classes. For example, man being the class-concept, all men will 
be the class. But it will not be all men qua concept which will be the 
class, but what this concept denotes, i.e . certain terms combined in the 
particular way indicated by all. The way of combination is essential, 
since any man or some man is plainly not the class, though either denotes 
combinations of precisely the same terms. It might seem as though, if 
we identify a class with the numerical conjunction of its terms, we must 
deny the distinction of a term from a class whose only member is that 
term. But we found in Chapter x that a class must be always an object 
of a different logical type from its members, and that, in order to avoid 
the proposition xex, this doctrine must be extended even to classes 
which have only one member. How far this forbids us to identify 
classes with numerical conjunctions, I do not profess to decide ; in any 
case, the distinction between a term and the class whose only member 
it is must be made, and yet classes must be taken extensionally to the 



132 Number [chap, xv 

degree involved in their being determinate when their members are 
given. Such classes are called by Frege Werthverlavfe\ and cardinal 
numbers are to be regarded as classes in this sense. 

127. There is still, however, a certain difficulty, which is this: a 
class seems to be not many terms, but to be itself a single term, even 
when many terms are members of the class. This difficulty would seem 
to indicate that the class cannot be identified with all its members, but 
is rather to be regarded as the whole which they compose. In order, 
however, to state the difficulty in an unobjectionable manner, we must 
exclude unity and plurality from the statement of it, since these notions 
were to be defined by means of the notion of class. And here it may be 
well to clear up a point which is likely to occur to the reader. Is the 
notion of one presupposed every time we speak of a term ? A term, 
it may be said, means one terra, and thus no statement can be made 
concerning a term without presupposing one. In some sense of owe, this 
proposition seems indubitable. Whatever is, is one : being and one, as 
Leibniz remarks, are convertible terms*. It is difficult to be sure how 
far such statements are merely grammatical. For although whatever 
is, is one, yet it is equally true that whatever are, are many. But the 
truth seems to be that the kind of object which is a class, i.e. the kind 
of object denoted by aU men , or by any concept of a class, is not one 
except where the class has only one term, and must not be made a single 
logical subject. There is, as we said in Part I, Chapter vi, in simple cases an 
associated single term which is the class as a whole ; but this is sometimes 
absent, and is in any case not identical with the class as many. But in 
this view there is not a contradiction, as in the theory that verbs and 
adjectives cannot be made subjects ; for assertions can be made about 
classes as many, but the subject of such assertions is many, not one only 
as in other assertions. “Brown and Jones are two of Miss Smith’s 
suitors” is an assertion about the class “Brown and Jones,” but not 
about this class considered as a single term. Thus one-ness belongs, in 
this view, to a certain type of logical subjects, but classes which are not 
one, may yet have assertions made about them. Hence we conclude that 
one-ness is implied, but not presupposed, in statements about a term, 
and “ a term ” is to be regarded as an indefinable. 

128. It seems necessary, however, to make a distinction as regards 
the use of one. The sense in which every object is one, which is 
apparently involved in speaking of an object, is, as Frege urges t, a very 
shadowy sense, since it is applicable to everything alike. But the sense 
in which a class may be said to have one member is quite precise. 
A class u has one member when u is not null, and “x and y are nV’ 
implies “ x is identical with y .” Here the one-ness is a property of the 

* Ed. Gerhardt, n, p. 300. 

t Grundlagen der Aritkmetik, Breslau, 1884, p. 40. 



126-130] Addition of Terms and Addition of Classes 133 

class, which may therefore be called a unit-class. The x which is its 
only member may be itself a class of many terms, and this shows that 
the sense of one involved in one term or a term is not relevant to 
Arithmetic, for many terms as such may be a single member of a class 
of classes. One , therefore, is not to be asserted of terms, but of classes 
having one member in the above-defined sense ; i.e. “ u is one,** or better 

is a unit 1 ’’ means “ u is not null, and k x and y are t/.V implies 4 x 
and y are identical V The member of u , in this case, will itself be none 
or one or many if u is a class of classes ; but if u is a class of terms, 
the member of u will be neither none nor one nor many, but simply 
a term. 

129. The commonly received view, as regards finite numbers, is that 
they result from counting, or, as some philosophers would prefer to 
say, from synthesizing. Unfortunately, those who hold this view have 
not analyzed the notion of counting : if they had done so, they would 
have seen that it is very complex, and presupposes the very numbers 
which it is supposed to generate. 

The process of counting has, of course, a psychological aspect, but 
this is quite irrelevant to the theory of Arithmetic. What I wish now 
to point out is the logical process involved in the act of counting, which 
is as follows. When we say one, two, three, etc., we are necessarily 
considering some one-one relation which holds between the numbers used 
in counting and the objects counted. What is meant by the “ one, two, 
three ” is that the objects indicated by these numbers are their correlates 
with respect to the relation which we have in mind. (This relation, by 
the way, is usually extremely complex, and is apt to involve a reference 
to our state of mind at the moment.) Thus we correlate a class of objects 
with a class of numbers ; and the class of numbers consists of all the 
numbers from 1 up to some number n. The only immediate inference to be 
drawn from this correlation is, that the number of objects is the same as 
the number of numbers from 1 up to n. A further process is required to 
show that this number of numbers is n, which is only true, as a matter 
of fact, when n is finite, or, in a certain wider sense, when n is Oq (the 
smallest of infinite numbers). Moreover the process of counting gives us 
no indication as to what the numbers are, as to why they form a series, 
or as to how it is to be proved (in the cases where it is true) that there 
are n numbers from 1 up to n. Hence counting is irrelevant in the 
foundations of Arithmetic ; and with this conclusion, it may be dismissed 
until we come to order and ordinal numbers. 

130. Let us return to the notion of the numerical conjunction. It 
is plain that it is of such objects as “A and U A and B and C,” 
that numbers other than one are to be asserted. We examined such 
objects, in Part I, in relation to classes, with which we found them to 
be identical. Now we must investigate their relation to numbers and 
plurality. 



134 


Number 


[chap, xv 


The notion to be now examined is the notion of a numerical 
conjunction or, more shortly, a collection. This is not to be identified, 
to begin with, with the notion of a class , but is to receive a new and 
independent treatment. By a collection I mean what is conveyed by 
w A and B ” or “ A and B and C™ or any other enumeration of definite 
terms. The collection is defined by the actual mention of the terms, 
and the terms are connected by and . It would seem that and represents 
a fundamental way of combining terms, and it might be urged that 
just this way of combination is essential if anything is to result of which 
a number other than 1 is to be asserted. Collections do not presuppose 
numbers, since they result simply from the terms together with and : 
they could only presuppose numbers in the particular case where the 
terms of the collection themselves presupposed numbers. There is a 
grammatical difficulty which, since no method exists of avoiding it, 
must be pointed out and allowed for. A collection, grammatically, is 
one, whereas A and 2?, or A and B and C, are essentially many. The 
strict meaning of collection is the whole composed of many, but since a 
word is needed to denote the many themselves, I choose to use the word 
collection in this sense, so that a collection, according to the usage here 
adopted, is many and not one. 

As regards what is meant by the combination indicated by and, it 
gives what we called before the numerical conjunction. That is A and 
B is what is denoted by the concept of a class of which A and B are 
the only terms, and is precisely A and B denoted in the way which is 
indicated by all. We may say, if u be the class-concept corresponding 
to a class of which A and B are the only terms, that “all u\ s” is a 
concept which denotes the terms A , B combined in a certain way, and 
A and B are those terms combined in precisely that way. Thus A and 
B appears indistinguishable from the class, though distinguishable from 
the class-concept and from the concept of the class. Hence if u be a 
class of more than one term, it seems necessary to hold that u is not 
one, but many, since u is distinguished both from the class-concept and 
from the whole composed of the terms of Thus we are brought back 
to the dependence of numbers upon classes ; and where it is not said 
that the classes in question are finite, it is practically necessary to begin 
with class-concepts and the theory of denoting, not with the theory of 
and which has just been given. The theory of and applies practically 
only to finite numbers, and gives to finite numbers a position which is 
different, at least psychologically, from that of infinite numbers. There 


* A conclusive reason against identifying a class with the whole comjwxsed of its 
terms is, that one of these terms may be the class itself, as in the case “ class is a 
class,” or rather “ classes are one among classes.” The logical type of the clasRc/aw 
is of an infinite order, and therefore the usual objection to “ does not apply in 
this case. 



130-132] Addition of Terms and Addition of Classes 136 

are, in short, two ways of defining particular finite classes, but there is 
only one practicable way of defining particular infinite classes, namely 
by intension. It is largely the habit of considering classes primarily 
from the side of extension which has hitherto stood in the way of a 
correct logical theory of infinity. 

131. Addition, it should be carefully observed, is not primarily a 
method of forming numbers, but of forming classes or collections. If 
we add B to A , we do not obtain the number 2, but we obtain A and B y 
which is a collection of two terms, or a couple. And a couple is defined 
as follows : u is a couple if u hAs terms, and if, if x be a term of ?/, there 
is a term of u different from x y but if x y y be different terms of ?/, and z 
differs from x and from y y then every class to which z belongs differs 
from u. In this definition, only diversity occurs, together with the 
notion of a class having terms. It might no doubt be objected that we 
have to take just two terms x y y in the above definition : but as a 
matter of fact any finite number can be defined by induction without 
introducing more than one term. For, if n has been defined, a class u 
has n -f 1 terms when, if x be a term of w, the number of terms of u 
which differ from x is n. And the notion of the arithmetical sum n + 1 
is obtained from that of the logical sum of a class of n terms and a class 
of one term. When we sav 1 +1=2, it is not possible that we should 
mean 1 and 1, since there is only one 1 : if we take 1 as an individual, 

1 and 1 is nonsense, while if we take it as a class, the rule of Symbolic 
.Logic applies, according to which 1 and 1 is 1. Thus in the corresponding 
logical proposition, we have on the left-hand side terms of which 1 can 
be asserted, and on the right-hand side we have a couple. That is, 
1 + 1 = 2 means M one term and one term are two terms," or, stating the 
proposition in terms of variables, “if u has one term and v has one 
term, and u differs from v , their logical sum has two terms." It is to be 
observed that on the left-hand side we have a numerical conjunction of 
propositions, while on the right-hand side we have a proposition con- 
cerning a numerical conjunction of terms. But the true premiss, in the 
above proposition, is not the conjunction of the three propositions, but 
their logical product. This point, however, has little importance in the 
present connection. 

132. Thus the only point which remains is this : Does the notion 
of a term presuppose the notion of 1 ? For we have seen that all 
numbers except 0 involve in their definitions the notion of a term, and 
if this in turn involves 1, the definition of 1 becomes circular, and 1 will 
have to be allowed to be indefinable. This objection to our procedure 
is answered by the doctrine of § 128, that a term is not one in the sense 
which is relevant to Arithmetic, or in the sense which is opposed to 
many . The notion of any term is a logical indefinable, presupposed in 
formal truth and in the whole theory of the variable ; but this notion is 
that of the variable conjunction of terms, which in no way involves the 



Number 


136 


[CHAP. XV 


number 1. There is therefore nothing circular in defining the number 1 
by means of the notion of a term or of any term. 

To sum up: Numbers are classes of classes, namely of all classes 
similar to a given class. Here classes have to be understood in the 
sense of numerical conjunctions in the case of classes having many 
terms ; but a class may have no terms, and a class of one term is distinct 
from that term, so that a class is not simply the sum of its terms. Only 
classes have numbers ; of what is commonly called one object, it is not 
true, at least in the sense required, to say that it is one, as appears from 
the fact that the object may be a class of many terms. “ One object ” 
seems to mean merely “ a logical subject in some proposition.” Finite 
numbers are not to be regarded as generated by counting, which on the 
contrary presupposes them ; and addition is primarily logical addition, 
first of propositions, then of classes, from which latter arithmetical 
addition is derivative. The assertion of numbers depends upon the fact 
that a class of many terms can be a logical subject without being 
arithmetically one. Thus it appeared that no philosophical argument 
could overthrow the mathematical theory of cardinal numbers set forth 
in Chapters xi to xiv. 



CHAPTER XVI. 


WHOLE ANI) PART. 

133. Foil the comprehension of analysis, it is necessary to investigate 
the notion of whole and part, a notion which has been wrapped in 
obscurity — though not without certain more or less valid logical 
reasons — by the writers who may be roughly called Hegelian. In the 
present chapter I shall do my best to set forth a straightforward and 
non-mystical theory of the subject, leaving controversy as far as possible 
on one side. It may be well to point out, to begin with, that I shall 
use the word whole as strictly correlative to part , so that nothing will 
be called a whole unless it has parts. Simple terms, such as points, 
instants, colours, or the fundamental concepts of logic, will not lie called 
wholes. 

Terms which are not classes may be, as we saw in the preceding 
chapter, of two kinds. The first kind are simple: these may be 
characterized, though not defined, by the fact that the propositions 
asserting the being of such terms have no presuppositions. The second 
kind of terms that are not classes, on the other hand, are complex, and 
in their case, their being presupposes the being of certain other terms. 
Whatever is not a class is called a unit , and thus units are either simple 
or complex. A complex unit is a whole; its parts are other units, 
whether simple or complex, which are presupposed in it. This suggests 
the possibility of defining whole and part by means of logical priority, 
a suggestion which, though it must be ultimately rejected, it will be 
necessary to examine at length. 

134. Wherever we have a one-sided formal implication, it may be 
urged, if the two propositional functions involved are obtainable one from 
the other by the variation of a single constituent, then what is implied 
is simpler than what implies it. Thus “Socrates is a man" implies 
“ Socrates is a mortal, 1 ' but the latter proposition does not imply the 
former: also the latter proposition is simpler than the former, since 
man is a concept of which mortal forms part. Again, if we take 
a proposition asserting a relation of two entities A and 5, this 
proposition implies the being of A and the being of fi, and the being of 



138 Number [CHAP, xvi 

the relation, none of which implies the proposition, and each of which is 
simpler than the proposition. There will only be equal complexity — 
according to the theory that intension and extension vary inversely as 
one another — in cases of mutual implication, such as w A is greater 
than B ” and “ B is less than A* Thus we might be tempted to set up 
the following definition : A is said to be part of B when B is implies 
A is, but A is does not imply B is. If this definition could be main- 
tained, whole and part would not be a new indefinable, but would be 
derivative from logical priority. There are, however, reasons why such 
an opinion is untenable. 

The first objection is, that logical priority is not a simple relation : 
implication is simple, but logical priority of A to B requires not only 
ik B implies A? but also “A does not imply BT (For convenience, 
I shall say that A implies B when A is implies B is.) This state of 
things, it is true, is realized when A is part of B ; but it seems necessary 
to regard the relation of whole to part as something simple, which must 
be different from any possible relation of one whole to another which is 
not part of it. This would not result from the above definition. For 
example, “ A is greater and better than B ” implies “ B is less than A" 
but the converse implication does not hold : yet the latter proposition is 
not part of the former*. 

Another objection is derived from such cases as redness und colour. 
These two concepts appear to be equally simple: there is no specification, 
other and simpler than redness itself, which can be added to colour to 
produce redness, in the way in which specifications will turn mortal, into 
man. Hence A is red is no more complex than A is coloured, although 
there is here a one-sided implication. Redness, in fact, appears to be 
(when taken to mean one particular shade) a simple concept, which, 
although it implies colour, does not contain colour as a constituent. 
The inverse relation of extension and intension, therefore, does not hold 
in all cases. For these reasons, we must reject, in spite of their very 
close connection, the attempt to define whole and part by means of 
implication. 

135. Having failed to define wholes by logical priority, we shall 
not, I think, find it possible to define them at all. The relation of 
whole and part is, it would seem, an indefinable and ultimate relation, 
or rather, it is several relations, often confounded, of which one at least 
is indefinable. The relation of a part to a whole must be differently 
discussed according to the nature both of the whole and of the parts. 
Let us begin with the simplest case, and proceed gradually to those that 
are more elaborate. 

(1) Whenever we have any collection of many terms, in the sense 
explained in the preceding chapter, there the terms, provided there is 


* See Part IV, Chap. xxvn. 



Whole and Part 


13d 


134, 135] 

some non-quadratic propositional function which they all satisfy, together 
form a whole. In the preceding chapter we regarded the class as formed by 
all the terms, but usage seems to show no reason why the class should not 
equally be regarded as the whole composed of all the terms in those cases 
where there is such a whole. The first is the class as many, the second 
the class as one. Each of the terms then has to the whole a certain 
indefinable relation*, which is one meaning of the relation of whole and 
part. The whole is, in this case, a whole of a particular kind, which 
I shall call an aggregate : it differs from wholes of other kinds by the 
fact that it is definite as soon as its constituents are known. 

(2) But the above relation holds only between the aggregate and 
the single terms of the collection composing the aggregate : the relation 
to our aggregate of aggregates containing some but not all the terms 
of our aggregate, is a different relation, though also one which would be 
commonly called a relation of part to whole. For example, the relation 
of the Greek nation to the human race is different from that of Socrates 
to the human race ; and the relation of the whole of the primes to the 
whole of the numbers is different from that of 2 to the whole of the 
numbers. This most vital distinction is due to Peanof. The relation 
of a subordinate aggregate to one in which it is contained can be defined, 
as was explained in Part I, by means of implication and the first kind of 
relation of part to whole. If //, v be two aggregates, and for every 
value of x 44 x is a u ” implies 44 x is a z’," then, provided the converse 
implication does not hold, u is a proper part (in the second sense) of v . 
This sense of whole and part, therefore, is derivative and definable. 

(3) But there is another kind of whole, which may be called a unity . 
Such a whole is always a proposition, though it need not be an averted 
proposition. For example, 44 A differs from B" or 44 ^Ts difference from 
B? is a complex of which the parts are A and B and difference ; but 
this sense of whole and part is different from the previous senses, since 
44 A differs from B " is not an aggregate, and has no parts at all in the 
first two senses of parts. It is parts in this third sense that are chiefly 
considered by philosophers, while the first two senses are those usually 
relevant in symbolic logic and mathematics. This third sense of part is 
the sense which corresponds to analysis : it appears to be indefinable, 
like the first sense — i.e. 9 I know no way of defining it. It must be held 
that the three senses are always to be kept distinct : i.e., if A is part 
of B in one sense, while B is part of C in another, it must not be 
inferred (in general) that A is part of C in any of the three senses. But 
we may make a fourth general sense, in which anything which is part in 

* Which may, if we choose, be taken as Peano’s #. The objection to this 
meaning for « is that not every propositional function defines a whole of the kind 
required. The whole differs from the class as many by being of the same tyjte as its 
terms. 

t Cf. e.g. F. 1901, § 1, Prop. 4. 4, note (p. 12). 



140 


Number 


[chap, xvi 

any sense, or part in one sense of part in another, is to be called a part. 
This sense, however, has seldom, if ever, any utility in actual discussion. 

136. The difference between the kinds of wholes is important, 
and illustrates a fundamental point in Logic. I shall therefore repeat 
it in other words. Any collection whatever, if defined by a non-quadratic 
propositional function, though as such it is many, yet composes a whole, 
whose parts are the terms of the collection or any whole composed of some 
of the terms of the collection. It is highly important to realize the differ- 
ence between a whole and all its parts, even in this case where the difference 
is a minimum. The word collection , being singular, applies more strictly 
to the whole than to all the parts ; but convenience of expression has led 
me to neglect grammar, and speak of all the terms as the collection. 
The whole formed of the terms of the collection I call an aggregate. 
Such a whole is completely specified when all its simple constituents are 
specified ; its parts have no direct connection inter se , but only the 
indirect connection involved in being parts of one and the same whole. 
But other wholes occur, which contain relations or what may be called 
predicates, not occurring simply as terms in a collection, but as relating 
or qualifying. Such wholes are always propositions. These are not 
completely specified when their parts are all known. Take, as a simple 
instance, the proposition “ A differs from B where A and B are simple 
terms. The simple parts of this whole are A and B and difference ; but 
the enumeration of these three does not specify the whole, since there 
are two other wholes composed of the same parts, namely the aggregate 
formed of A and B and difference, and the proposition U B differs 
from A? In the former case, although the whole was different from 
all its parts, yet it was completely specified by specifying its parts ; but 
in the present case, not only is the whole different, but it is not even 
specified by specifying its parts. We cannot explain this fact by saying 
that the parts stand in certain relations which are omitted in the 
analysis; for in the above case of “ A differs from B? the relation was 
included in the analysis. The fact seems to be that a relation is one 
thing when it relates, and another when it is merely enumerated as a 
term in a collection. There are certain fundamental difficulties in this 
view, which however I leave aside as irrelevant to our present purpose*. 

Similar remarks apply to A is, which is a whole composed of A and 
Being , but is different from the whole formed of the collection A and 
Being. A is one raises the same point, and so does A and B are two . 
Indeed all propositions raise this point, and we may distinguish them 
among complex terms by the fact that they raise it. 

Thus we see that there are two very different classes of wholes, of 
which the first will be called aggregates , while the second will be called 
unities. ( Unit is a word having a quite different application, since what- 


* See Part I, Chap, iv, esp. § 54. 



Whole and Part 


141 


135-139] 

ever is a class which is not null, and is such that, if x and y be members 
of it, x and y are identical, is a unit.) £ach class of wholes consists of 
terms not simply equivalent to all their parts ; but in the case of unities, 
the whole is not even specified by its parts. For example, the parts A> 
greater than , B , may compose simply an aggregate, or either of the 
propositions “ A is greater than “B is greater than A . v> Unities 
thus involve problems from which aggregates are free. As aggregates 
are more specially relevant to mathematics than unities, I shall in 
future generally confine myself to the former. 

137. It is important to realize that a whole is a new single term, 
distinct from each of its parts and from all of them: it is one, not many*, 
and is related to the parts, but has a being distinct from theirs. The 
reader may perhaps be inclined to doubt whether there is any need of 
wholes other than unities; but the following reasons seem to make 
aggregates logically unavoidable. (1) We speak of one collection, one 
manifold, etc., and it would seem that in all these cast's there really is 
something that is a single term. (2) The theory of fractions, as we shall 
shortly see, appears to depend partly upon aggregates. (3) We shall find 
it necessary, in the theory of extensive quantity, to assume that aggregates, 
even when they are infinite, have what may be called magnitude of 
divisibility, and that two infinite aggregates may have the same number 
of terms without having the same magnitude of divisibility : this theory, 
we shall find, is indispensable in metrical geometry. For these reasons, 
it would seem, the aggregate must be admitted as an entity distinct 
from all its constituents, and having to each of them a certain ultimate 
and indefinable relation. 

138. I have already touched on a very important logical doctrine, 
which the theory of whole and part brings into prominence — I mean the 
doctrine that analysis is falsification. Whatever can be analyzed is a 
whole, and we have already seen that analysis of wholes is in some 
measure falsification. But it is important to realize the very narrow 
limits of this doctrine. We cannot conclude that the parts of a whole 
are not really its parts, nor that the parts are not presupposed in the 
whole in a sense in which the whole is not presupposed in the parts, nor 
yet that the logically prior is not usually simpler than the logically 
subsequent. In short, though analysis gives us the truth, and nothing 
but the truth, yet it can never give us the whole truth. This is the 
only sense in which the doctrine is to be accepted. In any wider sense, 
it becomes merely a cloak for laziness, by giving an excuse to those who 
dislike the labour of analysis. 

139. It is to be observed that what we called classes as one may 
always, except where they contain one term or none, or are defined by 
quadratic propositional functions, be interpreted as aggregates. The 


* /.e. it is of the same logical type as its simple parts. 



142 


Number 


[chap, xvi 

logical product of two classes as one will be the common part (in the 
second of our three senses) of the two aggregates, and their sum will 
be the aggregate which is identical with or part of (again in the second 
sense) any aggregate of which the two given aggregates are parts, but is 
neither identical with nor part of any other aggregate*. The relation 
of whole and part, in the second of our three senses, is transitive and 
asymmetrical, but is distinguished from other such relations by the fact 
of allowing logical addition and multiplication. It is this peculiarity 
which forms the basis of the Logical Calculus as developed by writers 
previous to Peano and Frege (including Schr<ider)t. But wherever infinite 
wholes are concerned it is necessary, and in many other cases it is 
practically unavoidable, to begin with a class-concept or predicate or 
propositional function, and obtain the aggregate from this. Thus the 
theory of whole and part is less fundamental logically than that of 
predicates or class-concepts or propositional functions; and it is for 
this reason that the consideration of it has been postponed to so late 
a stage. 


* Cf. Peano, F. 1901, § 2, Prop. 10 (p. 19). 
t See e.g. his Algebra der Logik, Vol. i (Leipzig, 1890). 



CHAPTER XVII. 


INFINITE WHOLES. 

140. lx the present chapter the special difficulties of infinity are 
not to be considered : all these are postponed to Part V. My object 
now is to consider two questions : (1) Are there any infinite wholes? 
(2) If so, must an infinite whole which contains parts in the second of 
our three senses be an aggregate of parts in the first sense ? In order to 
avoid the reference to the first, second and third senses, I propose hence- 
forward to use the following phraseology : A part in the first sense is to 
be called a term of the whole* ; a part in the second sense is to be called 
a. part simply; and a part in the third sense will be called a constituent 
of the whole. Thus terms and parts belong to aggregates, while con- 
stituents belong to unities. The consideration of aggregates and unities, 
where infinity is concerned, must be separately conducted. I shall begin 
with aggregates. 

An infinite aggregate is an aggregate corresponding to an infinite 
class, i.e. an aggregate which has an infinite number of terms. Such 
aggregates are defined by the fact that they contain parts which have 
as many terms as themselves. Our first question is : Are there any such 
aggregates ? 

Infinite aggregates are often denied. Even Leibniz, favourable as 
he was to the actual infinite, maintained that, where infinite classes are 
concerned, it is possible to make valid statements about any term of the 
class, but not about all the terms, nor yet about the whole which (as he 
would say) they do not compose f. Kant, again, has been much criticised 
for maintaining that space is an infinite given whole. Many maintain 
that every aggregate must have a finite number of terms, and that 
where this condition is not fulfilled there is no true whole. But I do 
not believe that this view can be successfully defended. Among those 
who deny that space is a given whole, not a few would admit that what 
they are pleased to call a finite space may be a given whole, for instance, 

* A part in this sense will also be sometimes called a simple or indivisible part 

t Cf. Phil. Werke , ed. Gerhardt, ii, p. 315 ; also i, p. 338, v, pp. 144-5. 



144 


Number 


[chap, xvn 

the space in a room, a box, a bag, or a book -case. But such a space is 
only finite in a psychological sense, i.e . in the sense that we can take it 
in at a glance : it is not finite in the sense that it is an aggregate of a 
finite number of terms, nor yet a unity of a finite number of constituents. 
Thus to admit that such a space can be a whole is to admit that there 
are wholes which are not finite. (This does not follow, it should be 
observed, from the admission of material objects apparently occupying 
finite spaces, for it is always possible to hold that such objects, though 
apparently continuous, consist really of a large but finite number of 
material points.) With respect to time, the same argument holds : to 
say, for example, that a certain length of time elapses between sunrise 
and sunset, is to admit an infinite whole, or at least a whole which is not 
finite. It is customary with philosophers to deny the reality of space 
and time, and to deny also that, if they were real, they would be 
aggregates. I shall endeavour to show, in Part VI, that these denials 
are supported by a faulty logic, and by the now resolved difficulties of 
infinity. Since science and common sense join in the opposite view, it 
will therefore be accepted ; and thus, since no argument a priori can 
now be adduced against infinite aggregates, we derive from space and 
time an argument in their favour. 

Again, the natural numbers, or the fractions between 0 and 1, or the 
sum-total of all colours, are infinite, and seem to be true aggregates : 
the position that, although true propositions can be made about any 
number, yet there are no true propositions about all numbers, could be 
supported formerly, as Leibniz supported it, by the supposed contra- 
dictions of infinity, but has become, since Cantor’s solution of these 
contradictions, a wholly unnecessary paradox. And where a collection 
can be defined by a non-quadratic propositional function, this must be 
held, I think, to imply that there is a genuine aggregate composed 
of the terms of the collection. It may be observed also that, if there 
were no infinite wholes, the word Universe would be wholly destitute of 
meaning. 

141. We must, then, admit infinite aggregates. It remains to ask 
a more difficult question, namely : Are we to admit infinite unities ? 
This question may also be stated in the form : Are there any 
infinitely complex propositions ? This question is one of great logical 
importance, and we shall require much care both in stating and in 
discussing it. 

The first point is to be clear as to the meaning of an infinite unity. 
A unity will be infinite when the aggregate of all its constituents is 
infinite, but this scarcely constitutes the meaning of an infinite unity. 
In order to obtain the meaning, we must introduce the notion of a 
simple constituent. We may observe, to begin with, that a constituent 
of a constituent is a constituent of the unity, i.e. this form of the 
relation of part to whole, like the second, but unlike the first form, is 



140 , 141 ] Infinite Wholes 145 

transitive. A simple constituent may now be defined as a constituent 
which itself has no constituents. We may assume, in order to eliminate 
the question concerning aggregates, that no constituent of our unity is 
to be an aggregate, or, if there be a constituent which is an aggregate, 
then this constituent is to be taken as simple. (This view of an aggre- 
gate is rendered legitimate by the fact that an aggregate is a single term, 
and does not have that kind of complexity which belongs to propositions.) 
With this the definition of a simple constituent is completed. 

We may now define an infinite unity as follows: A unity is finite 
when, and only when, the aggregate of its simple constituents is finite. 
In all other cases a unity is said to be infinite. We have to inquire 
whether there are any such unities*. 

If a unity is infinite, it is possible to find a constituent unity, which 
again contains a constituent unity, and so on without end. If there be 
any unities of this nature, two cases are prirnafacie possible. (1) There 
may be simple constituents of our unity, but these must be infinite in 
number. (2) There may be no simple constituents at all, but all 
constituents, without exception, may be complex ; or, to take a slightly 
more complicated case, it may happen that, although there are some 
simple constituents, yet these and the unities composed of them do not 
constitute all the constituents of the original unity. A unity of either 
of these two kinds will be called infinite. The two kinds, though 
distinct, may he considered together. 

An infinite unity will be an infinitely complex proposition : it will 
not be analyzable in any way into a finite number of constituents. It 
thus differs radically from assertions about infinite aggregates. For 
example, the proposition u any number has a successor " is composed of 
a finite number of constituents : the number of concepts entering into it 
can be enumerated, and in addition to these there is an infinite aggregate 
of terms denoted in the way indicated by any , which counts as one 
constituent. Indeed it may be said that the logical purpose which is 
served by the theory of denoting is, to enable propositions of finite 
complexity to deal with infinite classes of terms : this object is effected 
by all , any , and every , and if it were not effected, every general pro- 
position about an infinite class would have to be infinitely complex. 
Now, for my part, I see no possible way of deciding whether propositions 
of infinite complexity are possible or not ; but this at least is clear, that 
all the propositions known to us (and, it would seem, all propositions 
that we can know) are of finite complexity. It is only by obtaining 
such propositions about infinite classes that we are enabled to deal with 
infinity ; and it is a remarkable and fortunate fact that this method is 
successful. Thus the question whether or not there are infinite unities 
must be left unresolved ; the only thing we can say, on this subject, is 


* In Leibniz's philosophy, all contingent things are infinite unities. 



146 


Number 


[chap, xvii 

that no such unities occur in any department of human knowledge, and 
therefore none such are relevant to the foundations of mathematics. 

142. I come now to our second question : Must an infinite whole 
which contains pails be an aggregate of terms ? It is often held, for 
example, that spaces have parts, and can be divided ad lib ., but that 
they have no simple parts, i.e. they are not aggregates of points. The 
same view is put forward as regards periods of time. Now it is plain 
that, if our definition of a part by means of terms (i.e. of the second 
sense of part by means of the first) was correct, the present problem can 
never arise, since parts only belong to aggregates. But it may be urged 
that the notion of part ought to be taken as an indefinable, and that 
therefore it may apply to other wholes than aggregates. This will 
require that we should add to aggregates and unities a new kind of 
whole, corresponding to the second sense of part. This will be a whole 
which has parts in the second sense, but is not an aggregate or a unity. 
Such a whole seems to be what many philosophers are fond of calling a 
continuum, and space and time are often held to afford instances of such 
a whole. 

Now it may be admitted that, among infinite wholes, we find a 
distinction which seem s relevant, but which, I believe, is in reality 
merely psychological. In some cases, we feel no doubt as to the terms, 
but great doubt as to the whole, while in others, the whole seems 
obvious, but the terms seem a precarious inference. The ratios between 
0 and 1, for instance, are certainly indivisible entities; but the whole 
aggregate of ratios between 0 and 1 seems to be of the nature of a 
construction or inference. On the other hand, sensible spaces and times 
seem to be obvious wholes ; but the inference to indivisible points and 
instants is so obscure as to be often regarded as illegitimate. This 
distinction seems, however, to have no logical basis, but to be wholly 
dependent on the nature of our senses. A slight familiarity with co- 
ordinate geometry suffices to make a finite length seem strictly analogous 
to the stretch of fractions between 0 and 1. It must be admitted, 
nevertheless, that in cases where, as with the fractions, the indivisible 
parts are evident on inspection, the problem with which we are con- 
cerned does not arise. But to infer that all infinite wholes have 
indivisible parts merely because this is known to be the case with some 
of them, would certainly be rash. The general problem remains, 
therefore, namely : Given an infinite whole, is there a universal reason 
for supposing that it contains indivisible parts ? 

143. In the first place, the definition of an infinite whole must not 
be held to deny that it has an assignable number of simple pails which 
do not reconstitute it. For example, the stretch of fractions from 0 to 1 
has three simple parts, i, §. But these do not reconstitute the 
whole, that is, the whole has other parts which are not parts of the 
assigned parts or of the sum of the assigned parts. Again, if we form a 



147 


141 - 143 ] Infinite Wholes 

whole out of the number 1 and a line an inch long, this whole certainly 
has one simple part, namely 1 . Such a case as this may be excluded by 
asking whether every part of our whole either is simple or contains 
simple parts. In this case, if our whole be formed by adding n simple 
terms to an infinite whole, the n simple terms can be taken away, and 
the question can be asked concerning the infinite whole which is left. 
But again, the meaning of our question seems hardly to be: Is our 
infinite whole an actual aggregate of innumerable simple parts P This is 
doubtless an important question, but it is subsequent to the question we 
are asking, which is : Are there always simple parts at all P We may 
observe that, if a finite number of simple parts be found, and taken 
away from the whole, the remainder is always infinite. For if not, it 
would have a finite number ; and since the term of two finite numbers is 
finite, the original whole would then be finite. Hence if it can be 
shown that every infinite whole contains one simple part, it follows that 
it contains an infinite number of them. For, taking away the one 
simple part, the remainder is an infinite whole, and therefore has a new 
simple part, and so on. It follows that every part of the whole either is 
simple, or contains simple parts, provided that every infinite whole has 
at least one simple part. But it seems as hard to prove this as to prove 
that every infinite whole is an aggregate. 

If an infinite whole be divided into a finite number of parts, one at 
least of these parts must be infinite. If this be again divided, one of its 
parts must Ik* infinite, and so on. Thus no finite number of divisions 
will reduce all the parts to finitude. Successive divisions give an endless 
series of parts, and in such endless series there is (as we shall see in 
Parts IV and V) no manner of contradiction. Thus there is no method 
of proving by actual division that every infinite whole must be an 
aggregate. So far as this method can show, there is no more reason for 
simple constituents of infinite wholes than for a first moment in time or 
a last finite number. 

But perhaps a contradiction may emerge in the present case from the 
connection of whole and part with logical priority. It certainly seems a 
greater paradox to maintain that infinite wholes do not have indivisible 
parts than to maintain that there is no first moment in time or furthest 
limit to space. This might be explained by the fact that we know many 
simple terms, and some infinite wholes undoubtedly composed of simple 
terms, whereas we know of nothing suggesting a beginning of time or 
space. But it may perhaps have a more solid basis in logical priority. 
For the simpler is always implied in the more complex, and therefore 
there can be no truth about the more complex unless there is truth 
about the simpler. Thus in the analysis of our infinite whole, we are 
always dealing with entities which would not be at all unless their 
constituents were. This makes a real difference from the time-series, for 
example : a moment does not logically presuppose a previous moment, 



148 


Number 


[chap, xvii 

and if it did it would perhaps be self-contradictory to deny a first 
moment, as it has been held (for the same reason) self-contradictory to 
deny a First Cause. It seems to follow that infinite wholes would not 
have Iking at all, unless there were innumerable simple Beings whose 
Being is presupposed in that of the infinite wholes. For where the 
presupposition is false, the consequence is false also. Thus there seems 
a special reason for completing the infinite regress in the case of infinite 
wholes, which does not exist where other asymmetrical transitive relations 
are concerned. This is another instance of the peculiarity of the relation 
of whole and part: a relation so important and fundamental that almost 
all our philosophy depends upon the theory we adopt in regard to it. 

The same argument may be otherwise stated by asking how our 
infinite wholes are to be defined. The definition must not be infinitely 
complex, since this would require an infinite unity. Now if there is any 
definition which is of finite complexity, this cannot be obtained from 
the parts, since these are either infinitely numerous (in the case of an 
aggregate), or themselves as complex as the whole (in the case of a 
whole* Vhich is not an aggregate). But any definition which is of finite 
complexity will necessarily be intensional, i.e. it will give some character- 
istic of a collection of terms. There seems to be no other known method 
of defining an infinite whole, or of obtaining such a whole in a way not 
involving any infinite unity. 

The above argument, it must be admitted, is less conclusive than 
could be wished, considering the great importance of the point at issue. 
It may, however, be urged in support of it that all the arguments on 
the other side depend upon the supposed difficulties of infinity, and are 
therefore wholly fallacious; also that the procedure of Geometry and 
Dynamics (as will be shown in Parts VI and VII) imperatively demands 
points and instants. In all applications, in short, the results of the 
doctrine here advocated are far simpler, less paradoxical, and more 
logically satisfactory, than those of the opposite view. I shall therefore 
assume, throughout the remainder of this work, that all the infinite 
wholes with which we shall have to deal are aggregates of terms. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 


RATIOS ANI) FRACTIONS. 

144 . Thk present chapter, in so far as it deals with relations of 
integers, is essentially confined to finite integers : those that are infinite 
have no relations strictly analogous to what are usually called ratios. 
Rut I shall distinguish ratios, as relations between integers, from 
fractions, which are relations between aggregates, or rather between 
their magnitudes of divisibility; and fractions, we shall find, may 
express relations which hold where both aggregates are infinite. It will 
be necessary to begin with the mathematical definition of ratio, before 
proceeding to more general considerations. 

Ratio is commonly associated with multiplication and division, and 
in this way becomes indistinguishable from fractions. But multiplication 
and division are equally applicable to finite and infinite numbers, though 
in the case of infinite numbers they do not have the properties which 
connect them with ratio in the finite case. Hence it becomes desirable 
to develop a theory of ratio which shall be independent of multiplication 
and division. 

Two finite numbers are said to be consecutive when, if « be a class 
having one of the numbers, and one term be added to ?/, the resulting 
class has the other number. To be consecutive is thus a relation which 
is one-one and asymmetrical. If now a number a has to a number b 
the nth power of this relation of consecutiveness (powers of relations 
being defined by relative multiplication), then we have a + n = b. This 
equation expresses, between a and b, a one-one relation which is deter- 
minate when n is given. If now the mth power of this relation holds 
between a and b\ we shall have a' + mn = b'. Also we may define mn as 
0 + mn. If now we have three numbers a, 6, c such that ah = c, this 
equation expresses between a and c a one-one relation which is deter- 
minate when b is given. Let us call this relation B. Suppose we have 
also ub — c. Then a has to a' a relation which is the relative product 
of B and the converse of B\ where B' is derived from b' as B was derived 
from b. This relation we define as the ratio of a' to a. This theory 
has the advantage that it applies not only to finite integers, but to 



Number 


150 


[chap, xvm 


all other series of the same type, i.e. all series of type the which I call 
progressions. 

145. The only point which it is important, for our present purpose, 
to observe as regards the above definition of ratios is, that they are 
one-one relations between finite integers, which are with one exception 
asymmetrical, which are such that one and only one holds between any 
specified pair of finite integers, which are definable in terms of consecu- 
tiveness, and which themselves form a series having no first or last term 
and having a term, and therefore an infinite number of terms, between 
any two specified terms. From the fact that ratios are relations it 
results that no ratios are to be identified with integers : the ratio of 2 to 
1, for example, is a wholly different entity from 2. When, therefore, 
we speak of the series of ratios as containing integers, the integers said 
to be contained are not cardinal n umbel’s, but relations which have a 
certain one-one correspondence with cardinal numbers. The same remark 
applies to positive and negative numbers. The /*th power of the relation 
of consecutiveness is the positive number + n , which is plainly a wholly 
different concept from the cardinal number n. The confusion of entities 
with others to which they have some important one-one relation is an 
error to which mathematicians are very liable, and one which has 
produced the greatest havoc in the philosophy of mathematics. We 
shall find hereafter innumerable other instances of the same error, and it 
is well to realize, as early as possible, that any failure in subtlety of 
distinctions is sure, in this subject at least, to cause the most disastrous 
consequences. 

There is no difficulty in connecting the above theory of ratio with 
the usual theory derived from multiplication and division. But the 
usual theory does not show, as the present theory does, why the infinite 
integers do not have ratios strictly analogous to those of finite integers. 
The fact is, that ratio depends upon consecutiveness, and consecutiveness 
as above defined does not exist among infinite integers, since these are 
unchanged by the addition of 1. 

It should be observed that what is called addition of ratios demands 
a new set of relations among ratios, relations which may be called 
positive and negative ratios, just as certain relations among integers are 
positive and negative integers. This subject, however, need not be 
further developed. 

146. The above theory of ratio has, it must be confessed, a highly 
artificial appearance, and one which makes it seem extraordinary that 
ratios should occur in daily life. The fact is, it is not ratios, but 
fractions, that occur, and fractions are not purely arithmetical, but are 
really concerned with relations of whole and part. 

Propositions assorting fractions show an important difference from 
those asserting integers. We can say A is one, A and B are two, and 
so on ; but we cannot say A is one-third, or A and B are two-thirds. 



144 - 147 ] Ratios and Fractions 151 

There is always need of some second entity, to which our first has some 
fractional relation. We say A is one-third of C, A and B together are 
two-thirds of C, and so on. Fractions, in short, are either relations of 
a simple part to a whole, or of two wholes to one another. But it 
is not necessary that the one whole, or the simple part, should be part 
of the other whole. In the case of finite wholes, the matter seems 
simple : the fraction expresses the ratio of the number of parts in the 
one to the number in the other. But the consideration of infinite 
wholes will show us that this simple theory is inadequate to the facts. 

147. There is no doubt that the notion of half a league, or half 
a day, is a legitimate notion. It is therefore necessary to find some 
sense for fractions in which they do not essentially depend upon number. 
For, if a given period of twenty-four hours is to be divided into two 
continuous portions, each of which is to be half of the whole period, 
there is only one way of doing this : but Cantor has shown that every 
possible way of dividing the period into two continuous portions divides 
it into two portions having the same number of terms. There must be, 
therefore, some other respect in which two periods of twelve hours are 
equal, while a period of one hour and another of twenty-three hours 
are unequal. I shall have more to say upon this subject in Part III ; 
for the present I will point out that what we want is of the nature of a 
magnitude, and that it must be essentially a property of ordered wholes. 
I shall call this property magnitude of divisibility. To say now that A is 
one-half of B means : B is a whole, and if B be divided into two similar 
parts which have both the same magnitude of divisibility as each other, 
then A has the same magnitude of divisibility as each of these parts. 
We may interpret the fraction ^ somewhat more simply, by regarding 
it as a relation (analogous to ratio so long as finite wholes are concerned) 
between two magnitudes of divisibility. Thus finite integral fractions 
(such as w/1) will measure the relation of the divisibility of an aggregate 
of n terms to the divisibility of a single term ; the converse relation will 
be 1 jn. Thus here again we have a new class of entities which is in 
danger of being confused with finite cardinal integers, though in reality 
quite distinct. Fractions, as now interpreted, have the advantage (upon 
which all metrical geometry depends) that they introduce a discrimina- 
tion of greater and smaller among infinite aggregates having the same 
number of terms. We shall see more and more, as the logical inadequacy 
of the usual accounts of measurement is brought to light, how absolutely 
essential the notion of magnitude of divisibility really is. Fractions, 
then, in the sense in which they may express relations of infinite 
aggregates — and this is the sense which th£y usually have in daily life — 
are really of the nature of relations between magnitudes of divisibility ; 
and magnitudes of divisibility are only measured by number of parts 
where the aggregates concerned are finite. It may also be observed 
(though this remark is anticipatory) that, whereas ratios, as above 



152 


Number 


[chap, xviii 

defined, are essentially rational, fractions, in the sense, here given to 
them, are also capable of irrational values. But the development of 
this topic must l>e left for Part V. 

148. We may now sum up the results obtained in Part II. In the 
first four chapters, the modern mathematical theory of cardinal integers, 
as it results from the joint labours of arithmeticians and symbolic 
logicians, was briefly set forth. Chapter xi explained the notion of 
similar classes, and showed that the usual formal properties of integers 
result from defining them as classes of similar classes. In Chapter xn, 
we showed how arithmetical addition and multiplication both depend 
upon logical addition, and how both may be defined in a way which 
applies equally to finite and infinite numl)ers, and to finite and infinite 
sums and products, and which moreover introduces nowhere any idea of 
order. In Chapter xm, we gave the strict definition of an infinite class, 
as one which is similar to a class resulting from taking away one of its 
terms ; and we showed in outline how to connect this definition with the 
definition of finite numbers by mathematical induction. The special 
theory of finite integers was discussed in Chapter xiv, and it was shown 
how the primitive propositions, which Peano proves to be sufficient in 
this subject, can all be deduced from our definition of finite cardinal 
integers. This confirmed us in the opinion that Arithmetic contains no 
indefinables or indent onstrables beyond those of general logic. 

We then advanced, in Chapter xv, to the consideration of philoso- 
phical questions, with a view of testing critically the above mathematical 
deductions. We decided to regard both term and a term as indefinable, 
and to define the number 1, as well as all other numbers, by means of these 
indefinables (together with certain others). We also found it necessary 
to distinguish a class from its class-concept, since one class may have 
several different class-concepts. We decided that a class consists of all 
the terms denoted by the class-concept, denoted in a certain indefinable 
manner ; but it appeared that both common usage and the majority of 
mathematical purposes would allow us to identify a class with the whole 
formed of the terms denoted by the class-concept. The only reasons 
against this view were, the necessity of distinguishing a class containing 
only one term from that one term, and the fact that some classes are 
members of themselves. We found also a distinction between finite and 
infinite classes, that the former can, while the latter cannot, be defined 
extensionally, i.e. by actual enumeration of their terms. We then 
proceeded to discuss what may be called the addition of individuals, 
i.e. the notion involved in “A and B ” ; and we found that a more or less 
independent theory of finite integers can be based upon this notion. 
But it appeared finally, in virtue of our analysis of the notion of clcut,s> 
that this theory was really indistinguishable from the theory previously 
expounded, the only difference being that it adopted an extensional 
definition of classes. 



Ratios and Fractions 


153 


147, 148] 

Chapter xvi dealt with the relation of whole and part. We found 
that there are two indefinable senses of this relation, and one definable 
sense, and that there are two correspondingly different sorts of wholes, 
which we called unities and aggregates respectively. We saw also that, 
by extending the notion of aggregates to single terms and to the null- 
class, we could regard the whole of the traditional calculus of Symbolic 
Logic as an algebra specially applicable to the relations of wholes and 
parts in the definable sense. We considered next, in Chapter xvn, the 
notion of an infinite whole. It appeared that infinite unities, even if 
they lie logically possible, at any rate never appear in anything accessible 
to human knowledge. Hut infinite aggregates, we found, must be ad- 
mitted ; and it seemed that all infinite wholes which are not unities 
must be aggregates of terms, though it is by no means necessary that the 
terms should lx 1 simple. (They must, however, owing to the exclusion 
of infinite unities, be assumed to be of finite complexity.) 

In Chapter xvin, finally, we considered ratios and fractions : the former 
were found to somewhat complicated relations of finite integers, while 
the latter were relations between the divisibilities of aggregates. These 
divisibilities being magnitudes, their further discussion belongs to Part III, 
in which the general nature of quantity is to be considered. 




PA R,T 


in. 


QUANTITY. 




CHAPTER XIX. 


THE MEANING OF MAGNITUDE. 

149. Among the traditional problems of mathematical philosophy, 
few are more important than the relation of quantity to number. 
Opinion as to this relation has undergone many revolutions. Euclid, 
as is evident from his definitions of ratio and proportion, and indeed 
from his whole procedure, was not persuaded of the applicability of 
numbers to spatial magnitudes. When Des Cartes and Vieta, by the 
introduction of co-ordinate Geometry, made this applicability a funda- 
mental postulate of their systems, a new method was founded, which, 
however fruitful of results, involved, like most mathematical advances of 
the seventeenth century, a diminution of logical precision and a loss in 
subtlety of distinction. What was meant by measurement, and whether 
all spatial magnitudes were susceptible of a numerical measure, were 
questions for whose decision, until very lately, the necessary mathe- 
matical instrument was lacking; and even now much remains to be 
done before a complete answer can lie given. The view prevailed that 
number and quantity were the objects of mathematical investigation, 
and that the two were so similar as not to require careful separation. 
Thus number was applied to quantities without any hesitation, and 
conversely, where existing numbers were found inadequate to measure- 
ment, new ones were created on the sole ground that every quantity 
must have a numerical measure. 

All this is now happily changed. Two different lines of argument, 
conducted in the main by different men, have laid the foundations both 
for large generalizations, and for thorough accuracy in detail. On the 
one hand, Weierstrass, Dedekind, Cantor, and their followers, have 
pointed out that, if irrational numbers are to be significantly employed as 
measures of quantitative fractions, they must be defined without reference 
to quantity; and the same men who showed the necessity of such a 
definition have supplied the want which they had created. In' this way, 
during the last thirty or forty years, a new subject, which has added 
quite immeasurably to theoretical correctness, has been created, which 
may legitimately be called Arithmetic; for, starting with integers, it 



158 Quantity [chap, xix 

succeeds in defining whatever else it requires — rationals, limits, ir- 
rationals, continuity, and so on. It results that, for all Algebra and 
Analysis, it is unnecessary to assume any material beyond the integers, 
which, as we have seen, can themselves be defined in logical terms. 
It is this science, far more than non-Euclidean Geometry, that is really 
fatal to the Kantian theory of a priori intuitions as the basis of 
mathematics. Continuity and irrationals were formerly the strongholds 
of the school who may be called intuitionists, but these strongholds are 
theirs no longer. Arithmetic has grown so as to include all that can 
strictly be called pure in the traditional mathematics. 

150 . But, concurrently with this purist’s reform, an opposite advance 
has been effected. New branches of mathematics, which deal neither 
with number nor with quantity, have been invented; such are the 
Logical Calculus, Projective Geometry, and — in its essence — the Theory 
of Groups. Moreover it has appeared that measurement — if this means 
the correlation, with numbers, of entities which are not numbers or 
aggregates — is not a prerogative of quantities: some quantities cannot 
be measured, and some things which are not quantities (for example 
anharinonic ratios projeetively defined) can be measured. Measurement, 
in fact, as we shall see, is applicable to all series of a certain kind — a kind 
which excludes some quantities and includes some things which are 
not quantities. The separation between number and quantity is thus 
complete : each is wholly independent of the other. Quantity, moreover, 
has lost the mathematical importance which it used to possess, owing to 
the fact that most theorems concerning it can be generalized so as to 
become theorems concerning order. It would therefore be natural 
to discuss order before quantity. As all propositions concerning order 
can, however, be established independently for particular instances of 
order, and as quantity will afford an illustration, requiring slightly less 
effort of abstraction, of the principles to be applied to series in general ; 
as, further, the theory of distance, which forms a part of the theory of 
order, presupposes somewhat controversial opinions as to the nature 
of quantity, I shall follow the more traditional course, and consider 
quantity first. My aim will be to give, in the present chapter, a theory 
of quantity which does not depend upon number, and then to show the 
peculiar relation to number which is possessed by two special classes of 
quantities, upon which depends the measurement of quantities wherever 
this is possible. The whole of this Part, however — and it is important 
to realize this — is a concession to tradition ; for quantity, we shall find, 
is not definable in terms of logical constants, and is not properly a 
notion belonging to pure mathematics at all. I shall discuss quantity 
because it is traditionally supposed to occur in mathematics, and because 
a thorough discussion is required for disproving this supposition; but 
if the supposition did not exist, I should avoid all mention of any such 
notion as quantity. 



149 - 152 ] The meaning of Magnitude 159 

151 . In fixing the meaning of such a term as quantity or magnitude , 
one is faced with the difficulty that, however one may define the word, 
one must appear to depart from usage. This difficulty arises wherever 
two characteristics have been commonly supposed inseparable which, 
upon closer examination, are discovered to be capable of existing apart. 
In the case of magnitude, the usual meaning appears to imply (1 ) a 
capacity for the relations of greater and less, (2) divisibility. Of these 
characteristics, the first is supposed to imply the second. 13ut as I 
propose to deny the implication, I must either admit that some things 
which are indivisible are magnitudes, or that some things which are 
greater or less than others are not magnitudes. As one of these de- 
partures from usage is unavoidable, I shall choose the former, which 
I believe to be the less serious. A magnitude, then, is to be defined as 
anything which is greater or less than something else. 

It might be thought that equality should be mentioned, along with 
greater and less, in the definition of magnitude. We shall see reason 
to think, however — paradoxical as such a view may appear — that what 
can be greater or less than some term, can never be equal to any term 
whatever, and vice versa. This will require a distinction, whose necessity 
will become more and more evident as we proceed, between the kind of 
terms that can be equal, and the kind that can be greater or less. The 
former I shall call quantities , the latter magnitudes. An actual foot- 
rule is a quantity : its length is a magnitude. Magnitudes are more 
abstract than quantities : when two quantities are equal, they have the 
same magnitude. The necessity of this abstraction is the first point to 
be established. 

152. Setting aside magnitudes for the moment, let us consider 
quantities. A quantity is anything which is capable of quantitative 
equality to something else. Quantitative equality is to be distinguished 
from other kinds, such as arithmetical or logical equality. All kinds 
of equality have in common the three properties of being reflexive, 
symmetrical, and transitive, i.e. a term which has this relation at ail 
has this relation to itself ; if A has the relation to B , B has it to A ; 
if A has it to B , and B to C, A has it to C*. What it is that dis- 
tinguishes quantitative equality from other kinds, and whether this 
kind of equality is analyzable, is a further and more difficult question, 
to which we must now proceed. 

There are, so far as I know, three main views of quantitative 
equality. There is (1) the traditional view, which denies quantity as 

* On the independence of these three properties, see Peano, Revue de Mafhrmatique , 
vii, p. 22. The reflexive property is not strictly necessary ; what is properly necessary 
and w hat is alone (at first sight at any rate) true of quantitative equality, is, that there 
exists at least one pair of terms having the relation in question. It follow s then from 
the other two properties that each of these terms has to itself the relation in 
question. 



160 Quantity [chap, xix 

an independent idea, and asserts that two terms are equal when, and 
only when, they have the same number of parts. (2) There is what may 
be called the relative view of quantity, according to which equal, greater 
and less are all direct relations between quantities. In this view we 
have no need of magnitude, since sameness of magnitude is replaced 
by the symmetrical and transitive relation of equality. (3) There is 
the absolute theory of quantity, in which equality is not a direct relation, 
but is to be analyzed into possession of a common magnitude, i.e. into 
sameness of relation to a third term. In this case there will be a special 
kind of relation of a term to its magnitude ; between two magnitudes 
of the same kind there w ill be the relation of greater and less ; while 
equal, greater and less will apply to quantities only in virtue of their 
relation to magnitudes. The difference between the second and third 
theories is exactly typical of a difference which arises in the case of many 
other series, and notably in regard to space and time. The decision 
is, therefore, a matter of very considerable importance. 

163. (1) The kind of equality which consists in having the same 

number of parts has been already discussed in Part II. If this be 
indeed the meaning of quantitative equality, then quantity introduces 
no new idea. But it may be shown, I think, that greater and less have 
a wider field than whole and part, and an independent meaning. The 
arguments may be enumerated as follows : (a) We must admit indi- 
visible quantities; (/3) where the number of simple parts is infinite, 
there is no generalization of number which will give the recognized 
results as to inequality ; (7) some relations must be allowed to be 
quantitative, and relations are not even conceivably divisible ; (8) even 
where there is divisibility, the axiom that the whole is greater than the 
part must be allowed to be significant, and not a result of definition. 

(a) Some quantities are indivisible. For it is generally admitted 
that some psychical existents, such as pleasure and pain, are quantitative. 
If now equality means sameness in the number of indivisible parts, we 
shall have to regard a pleasure or a pain as consisting of a collection 
of units, all perfectly simple, and not, in any significant sense, equal 
inter se ; for the equality of compound pleasures results on this hypothesis, 
solely from the number of simple ones entering into their composition, 
so that equality is formally inapplicable to indivisible pleasures. If, on 
the other hand, we allow pleasures to be infinitely divisible, so that no 
unit we can take is indivisible, then the number of units in any given 
pleasure is wholly arbitrary, and if there is to be any equality of 
pleasures, we shall have to admit that any two units may be significantly 
called equal or unequal*. Hence we shall require for equality some 
meaning other than sameness as to the number of parts. This latter 

* 1 shall never use the word unequal to mean merely not equal, but always to 
mean greater or lent, i.e. not equal, though of the same kind of quantities. 



161 


152 , 153 ] The meaning of Magnitude 

theory, however, seems unavoidable. For there is not only no reason 
to regai-d pleasures as consisting of definite sums of indivisible units, 
but further— as a candid consideration will, I think, convince anyone — 
two pleasures can always he significantly judged equal or unequal. 
However small two pleasures may be, it must always be significant to 
say that they are equal. But on the theory I am combating, the judg- 
ment in question would suddenly cease to be significant when both 
pleasures were indivisible units. Such a view seems wholly unwarrant- 
able, and I cannot believe that it has Ix'en consciously held by those* 
who have advocated the premisses from which it follows. 

(8) Some quantities are infinitely divisible, and in these, whatever 
definition we take of infinite number, equality is not coextensive with 
sameness in the number of parts. In the first place, equality or 
inequality must always be definite : concerning two quantities of the 
same kind, one answer must be right and the other wrong, though it is 
often not in our power to decide the alternative. From this it follows 
that, where quantities consist of an infinite number of parts, if equality 
or inequality is to be reduced to number of parts at all, it must be 
reduced to number of simple parts ; for the number of complex parts 
that may t)e taken to make up the whole is wholly arbitrary. But 
equality, for example in Geometry, is far narrower than sameness in the 
number of parts. The cardinal number of parts in any two continuous 
portions of space is the same, as we know from Cantor ; even the ordinal 
number or type is the same for any two lengths whatever. Hence if 
there is to be any spatial inequality of the kind to which Geometry and 
common-sense have accustomed us, we must seek some other meaning for 
equality than that obtained from the number of parts. At this point 
I shall be told that the meaning is very obvious: it is obtained from 
superposition. Without trenching too far on discussions which belong 
to a later part, I nmy observe (a) that superposition applies to matter, 
not to space, (b) that as a criterion of equality, it presupposes that the 
matter superposed is rigid, (r) that rigidity means constancy as regards 
metrical properties. This shows that we cannot, without a vicious 
circle, define spatial equality by superposition. Spatial magnitude is, in 
fact, as indefinable as every other kind ; and number of parts, in this case 
as in all others where the number is infinite, is wholly inadequate even 
as a criterion. 

(7) Some relations are quantities. This is suggested by the above 
discussion of spatial magnitudes, where it is very natural to base equality 
upon distances. Although this view, as we shall see hereafter, is not 
wholly adequate, it is yet partly true. There appear to be in certain 
spaces, and there certainly are in some series (for instance that of the 

* E.g. Mr Bradley, “What do we mean by the Intensity of Psychical States?” 
Mind, N. S. Vol. iv ; see esp. p. 6. 



162 Quantity [chap, xix 

rational numbers), quantitative relations of distance among the various 
terms. Also similarity and difference appear to be quantities. Consider 
for example two shades of colour. It seems undeniable that two shades 
of red are more similar to each other than either is to a shade of blue; 
yet there is no common property in the one case which is not found in 
the other also. Red is a mere collective name for a certain series of 
.shades, and the only reason for giving a collective name to this series 
lies in the close resemblance between its terms. Hence red must not be 
regarded as a common property in virtue of which two shades of red 
resemble each other. And since relations are not even conceivably 
divisible, greater and less among relations cannot depend upon number 
of parts. 

(S) Finally, it is well to consider directly the meanings of greater 
and less on the one hand, and of whole and part on the other. Euclid’s 
axiom, that the whole is greater than the part, seems undeniably signi- 
ficant; but on the traditional view of quantity, this axiom would be 
a mere tautology. This point is again connected with the question 
whether superposition is to be taken as the meaning of equality, or as a 
mere criterion. On the latter view, the axiom must be significant, and 
we cannot identify magnitude with number of parts*. 

154. (2) There is therefore in quantity something over and above 

the ideas which we have hitherto discussed. It remains to decide between 
the relative and absolute theories of magnitude. 

The relative theory regards equal quantities as not possessed of any 
common property over and above that of unequal quantities, but as 
distinguished merely by the mutual relation of equality. There is no 
such thing as a magnitude, shared by equal quantities. We must not 
say : This and that are both a yard long ; we must say : This and that 
are equal, or are both equal to the standard yard in the Exchequer. 
Inequality is also a direct relation between quantities, not between 
magnitudes. There is nothing by which a set of equal quantities are 
distinguished from one which is not equal to them, except the relation of 
equality itself. The course of definition is, therefore, as follows : We 
have first a quality or relation, say pleasure, of which there are various 
instances, specialized, in the case of a quality, by temporal or spatio- 
temporal position, and in the case of a relation, by the terms between 
which it holds. Let us, to fix ideas, consider quantities of pleasure. 
Quantities of pleasure consist merely of the complexes pleasure at such a 
time , and pleasure at such another time (to w hich place may be added, if 
it be thought that pleasures have position in space). In the analysis of 
a particular pleasure, there is, according to the relational theory, no 
other element to be found. But on comparing these particular pleasures, 

* Compare, with the above discussion, Meinong, Ueber die Bedeutung des Weber'- 
when Ge&etzes, Hamburg and Leipzig, 181)6 ; especially Chap, i, § 8. 



158, 154] The m caning of Magnitude 168 

we find that any two have one and only one of three relations, equal, 
greater, and less. Why some have one relation, some another, is a 
question to which it is theoretically and strictly impossible to give an 
answer ; for there is, ex hypothesis no point of difference except temporal 
or spatio-temporal position, which is obviously irrelevant. Equal quan- 
tities of pleasure do not agree in any respect in which unequal ones 
differ : it merely happens that some have one relation and some another. 

This state of things, it must be admitted, is curious, and it becomes 
still more so when we examine the indemonstrable axioms which the 
relational theory obliges us to assume. They are the following (A, B> C 
being all quantities of one kind) : 

(a) A =B, or A is greater than B , or A is less than B. 

(b) A being given, there is always a /i, which may be identical 
with A y such that A = B. 

(c) If A -5, then B = A. 

(d) If A = B and B = C, then A = C. 

(c) If A is greater than B , then B is less than A. 

(f) If A is greater than J5, and B is greater than C\ then A is 
greater than C. 

(g) If A is greater than B, and B = C, then A is greater than C. 

(h) I f A = B, and B is greater than C\ then A is greater than C. 

From (b), (r), and (d) it follows that A = A*. From (e) and (f) it 

follows that, if A is less than By and B is less than C, then A is less than 
C ; from (r), (f), and (h) it follows that, if A is less than /?, and B = C> 
then A is less than C ; from (r), (e), and (g) it follows that, if A = /?, and 
B is less than C\ then A is less than C. (In the place of (b) we may put 
the axiom : If A be a quantity, then A = A.) These axioms, it will be 
observed, lead to the conclusion that, in any proposition asserting 
equality, excess, or defect, an equal quantity may be substituted any- 
where without affecting the truth or falsehood of the proposition. 
Further, the proposition A = A is an essential part of the theory. Now 
the first of these facts strongly suggests that what is relevant in quanti- 
tative propositions is not the actual quantity, but some property which 
it shares with other equal quantities. And this suggestion is almost 
demonstrated by the second fact, A = A. For it may be laid down that 
the only unanalyzable symmetrical and transitive relation which a term 
can have to itself is identity, if this be indeed a relation. Hence the 
relation of equality should l)e analyzable. Now to say that a relation is 
analyzable is to say either that it consists of two or more relations 
between its terms, which is plainly not the case here, or that, when it is 
said to hold between two terms, there is some third term to which both 
are related in ways which, when compounded, give the oiiginal relation. 

* This does not follow from (<■) and (d) alone, since they do not assert that A is 
ever equal to B. See Peano, ho, cit. 



164 Quantity [CHAP XIX 

Thus to assert that A is ZTs grandparent is to assert that there is some 
third person C, who is A ' s son or daughter and ZTs father or mother. 
Hence if equality be analyzable, two equal terms must both be related to 
some third term ; and since a term may be equal to itself, any two equal 
terms must have the same relation to the third term in question. But 
to admit this is to admit the absolute theory of magnitude. 

A direct inspection of what we mean when we say that two terms 
are equal or unequal will reinforce the objections to the relational 
theory. It seems preposterous to maintain that equal quantities have 
absolutely nothing in common beyond what is shared by unequal 
quantities. Moreover unequal quantities are not merely different : they 
are different in the specific manner expressed by saying that one is 
greater, the other less. Such a difference seems quite unintelligible 
unless there is some point of difference, where unequal quantities are 
concerned, which is absent where quantities are equal. Thus the rela- 
tional theory, though apparently not absolutely self-contradictory, is 
complicated and paradoxical. Both the complication and the paradox, 
we shall find, are entirely absent in the absolute theory. 

155. (6) In the absolute theory, there is, belonging to a set of 
equal quantities, one definite concept, namely a certain magnitude. 
Magnitudes are distinguished among concepts by the fact that they 
have the relations of greater and less (or at least one of them) to other 
terms, which are therefore also magnitudes. Two magnitudes cannot 
be equal, for equality belongs to quantities, and is defined as possession 
of the same magnitude. Every magnitude is a simple and indefinable 
concept. Not any two magnitudes are one greater and the other less ; 
on the contrary, given any magnitude, those which are greater or less 
than that magnitude form a certain definite class, within which any two 
are one greater and the other less. Such a class is called a kind of 
magnitude. A kind of magnitude may, however, be also defined in 
another way, which has to be connected with the above by an axiom. 
Every magnitude is a magnitude of something — pleasure, distance, area, 
etc. — and has thus a certain specific relation to the something of which 
it is a magnitude. This relation is very peculiar, and appears to be 
incapable of further definition. All magnitudes which have this relation 
to one and the same something (eg. pleasure) are magnitudes of one 
kind ; and with this definition, it becomes an axiom to say that, of two 
magnitudes of the same kind, one is greater and the other less. 

156. An objection to the above theory may be based on the 
relation of a magnitude to that whose magnitude it is. To fix our 
ideas, let us consider pleasure. A magnitude of pleasure is so much 
pleasure, such and such an intensity of pleasure. It seems difficult to 
regard this, as the absolute theory demands, as a simple idea: there 
seem to be two constituents, pleasure and intensity. Intensity need not 
be intensity of pleasure, and intensity of pleasure is distinct from 



165 


154 - 156 ] The meaning of Magnitude 

abstract pleasure. But what we require for the constitution of a certain 
magnitude of pleasure is, not intensity in general, but a certain specific 
intensity ; and a specific intensity cannot be indifferently of pleasure or 
of something else. We cannot first settle how much we will have, and 
then decide whether it is to be pleasure or mass. A specific intensity 
must be of a specific kind. Thus intensity and pleasure are not in- 
dependent and coordinate elements in the definition of a given amount 
of pleasure. There are different kinds of intensity, and different magni- 
tudes in each kind ; but magnitudes in different kinds must bo different. 
Thus it seems that the common element, indicated by the term intensity 
or magnitude , is not anv thing intrinsic, that can be discovered by analysis 
of a single term, but is merely the fact of being one term in a relation of 
inequality. Magnitudes are defined by the fact that they have this 
relation, and they do not, so far as the definition shows, agree in any- 
thing else. The class to which they all belong, like the married portion 
of a community, is defined by mutual relations among its terms, not by 
a common relation to some outside term — unless, indeed, inequality 
itself were taken as such a term, which would be merely an unnecessary 
complication. It is necessary to consider what may lie called the 
extension or field of a relation, as well as that of a class-concept: and 
magnitude is the class which forms the extension of inequality. Thus 
magnitude of pleasure is complex, because it combines magnitude and 
pleasure; but a particular magnitude of pleasure is not complex, for 
magnitude does not enter into its concept at all. It is only a magnitude 
because it is greater or less than certain other terms; it is only a magni- 
tude of pleasure because of a certain relation which it has to pleasure. 
This is more easily understood where the particular magnitude has a 
special name. A yard, for instance, is a magnitude, liecause it is greater 
than a foot ; it is a magnitude of length, because it is what is called 
a length. Thus all magnitudes are simple concepts, and are classified 
into kinds by their relation to some quality or relation. The quantities 
which are instances of a magnitude are particularized by spatio-temporal 
position or (in the case of relations which are quantities) by the terms 
between which the relation holds. Quantities are not properly greater 
or less, for the relations of greater and less hold between their 
magnitudes, which are distinct from the quantities. 

When this theory is applied in the enumeration of the necessary 
axioms, we find a very notable simplification. The axioms in which 
equality appears have all become demonstrable, and we require only the 
following (L, AT, N being magnitudes of one kind) : 

(a) No magnitude is greater or less than itself. 

(b) L is greater than M or L is less than M. 

(c) If L is greater than M y then M is less than L. 

(i d ) If L is greater than M and M is greater than N , then L is 
greater than N. 



166 Quantity [chap. XIX 

The difficult axiom which we formerly called (6) is avoided, as are the 
other axioms concerning equality; and those that remain are simpler 
than our former set. 

157 . The decision between the absolute and relative theories can 
be made at once by appealing to a certain general principle, of very 
wide application, which I propose to call the principle of Abstraction. 
This principle asserts that, whenever a relation, of which there are 
instances, has the two properties of being symmetrical and transitive, 
then the relation in question is not primitive, but is analyzable into 
sameness of relation to some other term ; and that this common relation 
is such that there is only one term at most to which a given term can be 
so related, though many terms may be so related to a given term. 
(That is, the relation is like that of son to father : a man may have 
many sons, but can have only one father.) 

This principle, which we have already met with in connection with 
cardinals, may seem somewhat elaborate. It is, however, capable of 
proof, and is merely a careful statement of a very common assumption. 
It is generally held that all relations are analyzable into identity or 
diversity of content. Though I entirely reject this view, I retain, so far 
as symmetrical transitive relations are concerned, what is really a some- 
what modified statement of the traditional doctrine. Such relations, to 
adopt more usual phraseology, are always constituted by possession of 
a common property. But a common property is not a very precise 
conception, and will not, in most of its ordinary significations, formally 
fulfil the function of analyzing the relations in question. A common 
quality of two terms is usually regarded as a predicate of those terms. 
But the whole doctrine of subject and predicate, as the only form of 
which propositions are capable, and the whole denial of the ultimate 
reality of relations, are rejected by the logic advocated in the present 
work. Abandoning the word predicate , we may say that the most 
general sense which can be given to a common property is this : A 
common property of two terms is any third term to which both have 
one and the same relation. In this general sense, the possession of 
a common property is symmetrical, but not necessarily transitive. In 
order that it may be transitive, the relation to the common property 
must be such that only one term at most can lx* the property of any 
given term*. Such is the relation of a quantity to its magnitude, or of 
an event to the time at which it occurs : given one term of the relation, 
namely the referent, the other is determinate, but given the other, the 
one is by no means determinate. Thus it is capable of demonstration 
that the possession of a common property of the tyj>e in question always 


* The proof of these assertions is mathematical, and depends upon the Logic 
of Relations; it will be found in my article “Sur la Logique des Relations/’ 
It. d. M. vn. No. 2, § 1, Props. 6*. 1, and 0. 2. 



167 


156 - 168 ] The meaning of Magnitude 

leads to a symmetrical transitive relation. What the principle of 
abstraction asserts is the converse, that such relations only spring from 
common properties of the above type*. It should be observed that the 
relation of the terms to what I have called their common property can 
never be that which is usually indicated by the relation of subject to 
predicate, or of the individual to its class. For no subject (in the 
received view) can have only one predicate, and no individual can belong 
to only one class. The relation of the terms to their common property 
is, in general, different in different cases. In the present case, the 
quantity is a complex of which the magnitude forms an element : the 
relation of the quantity to the magnitude is further defined by the 
fact that the magnitude has to belong to a certain class, namely that of 
magnitudes. It must then be taken as an axiom (as in the case of 
colours) that two magnitudes of the same kind cannot coexist in one 
spatio-temporal place, or subsist as relations between the same pair of 
terms; and this supplies the required uniqueness of the magnitude. It 
is such synthetic judgments of incompatibility that lead to negative 
judgments ; but this is a purely logical topic, upon which it is not 
necessary to enlarge in this connection. 

158. We mav now sum up the above discussion in a brief statement 
of results. There are a certain pair of indefinable relations, called 
greater and leas ; these relations are asymmetrical and transitive, and 
are inconsistent the one with the other. Each is the converse of the 
other, in the sense that, whenever the one holds between A and B y the 
other holds between B and A. The terms which are capable of these 
relations are magnitudes. Every magnitude has a certain peculiar 
relation to some concept, expressed by saying that it is a magnitude o/*that 
concept. Two magnitudes which have this relation to the same concept 
are said to be of the same kind : to be of the same kind is the necessary 
and sufficient condition for the relations of greater and less. When a 
magnitude can be particularized by temporal, spatial, or spatio-temporal 
position, or when, being a relation, it can be particularized by taking 
into a consideration a pair of terms between which it holds, then the 
magnitude so particularized is called a quantity. Two magnitudes of 
the same kind can never be particularized by exactly the same specifi- 
cations. Two quantities which result from particularizing the same 
magnitude are said to be equal. 

Thus our indefinables are (1) greater and less, (2) every particular 
magnitude. Our indemonstrable propositions are : 

* The principle is proved by showing that, if R be a symmetrical transitive 
relation, and a a term of the field of R, a lias, to the class of terms to which it has 
the relation R taken as a whole, a many-one relation which, relationally multiplied 
by its converse, is equal to R. Thus a magnitude may, so far as formal arguments 
are concerned, be identified with a class of equal quantities. 



168 Quantity [chap, xix 

(1) Every magnitude has to some term the relation which makes 
it of a certain kind. 

(2) Any two magnitudes of the same kind are one greater and the 
other less. 

(3) Two magnitudes of the same kind, if capable of occupying space 
or time, cannot both have the same spatio-temporal position; if relations, 
can never be both relations between the same pair of terms. 

(4) No magnitude is greater than itself. 

(5) If A is greater than /?, B is less than A, and vice verm. 

(6) If A is greater than B and B is greater than C, then A is 
greater than C * . 

Further axioms characterize various species of magnitudes, but the 
above seem alone necessary to magnitude in general. None of them 
depend in any way upon number or measurement ; hence we may l>e 
undismayed in the presence of magnitudes which cannot be divided or 
measured, of which, in the next chapter, we shall find an abundance of 
instances. 

Note to Chapter XIX. The work of Ilerr Meinong on Weber’s Law, 
already alluded to, is one from which I have learnt so much, and with 
which I so largely agree, that it seems desirable to justify myself on 
the points in which I depart from it. This work begins (§1) by a 
characterization of magnitude as that which is limited towards zero. 
Zero is understood as the negation of magnitude, and after a discussion, 
the follow ing statement is adopted (p. 8): 

“ That is or has magnitude, which allows the interpolation of terms 
between itself and its contradictory opposite.” 

Whether this constitutes a definition, or a mere criterion, is left 
doubtful (#6. ), but in either case, it appears to me to be undesirable as 
a fundamental characterization of magnitude. It derives support, as 
Hen* Meinong points out (p. 6 w.), from its similarity to Kant’s 
“Anticipations of Perception Hut it is, if I am not mistaken, liable 
to several grave objections. In the first place, the whole theory of zero 
is most difficult, and seems subsequent, rather than prior, to the theory 
of other magnitudes. And to regard zero as the contradictory opposite 
of other magnitudes seems erroneous. The phrase should denote the 
class obtained by negation of the class 44 magnitudes of such and such 
a kind”; but this obviously would not yield the zero of that kind of 
magnitude. Whatever interpretation we give to the phrase, it would 
seem to imply that we must regard zero tvs not a magnitude of the kind 
whose zero it is. But in that case it is not less than the magnitudes of 
the kind in question, and there seems no particular meaning in saying 

* It is not necessary in (n) and (0) to add “A, H, C being magnitudes,*’ for the 
above relations of greater and less are what define magnitudes, and the addition 
would therefore be tautological. 

t Rein? Vrnamfl, ed. Hartenstein (1W»7), p. 1->H. 



169 


168] The meaning of Magnitude 

that a lesser magnitude is between zero and a greater magnitude. And 
in any case, the notion of between, as we shall see in Part IV, demands 
asymmetrical relations among the terms concerned. These relations, it 
would seem, are, in the case of magnitude, none other than greater and 
lens, which are therefore prior to the betweenness of magnitudes, and 
more suitable to definition. I shall endeavour at a later stage to give 
what I conceive to be the true theory of zero ; and it will then appear 
how difficult this subject is. It can hardly be wise, therefore, to introduce 
zero in the first account of magnitude. Other objections might lx; urged, 
as, for instance, that it is doubtful whether all kinds of magnitude have 
a zero ; that in discrete kinds of magnitude, zero is unimportant ; and 
that among distances, where the zero is simply identity, there is hardly 
the same relation of zero to negation or non-existence as in the case of 
qualities such as pleasure. But the main reason must be the logical 
inversion involved in the introduction of between before any asymmetrical 
relations have been specified from which it could arise. This subject 
will lie resumed in Chapter xxii. 



CHAPTER XX. 


THE RANGE OF QUANTITY. 

159. The questions to be discussed in the present chapter are these : 
What kinds of terms are there which, by their common relation to a 
number of magnitudes, constitute a class of quantities of one kind? 
Have all such terms anything else in common ? Is there any mark 
which will ensure that a term is thus related to a set of magnitudes? 
What sorts of terms are capable of degree, or intensity, or greater and 
less? 

The traditional view regards divisibility as a common mark of all 
terms having magnitude. We have already seen that there is no 
a priori ground for this view. We are now to examine the question 
inductively, to find as many undoubted instances of quantities as possible, 
and to inquire whether they all have divisibility or any other common 
mark. 

Any term of which a greater or less degree is possible contains under 
it a collection of magnitudes of one kind. Hence the comparative form 
in grammar is prima facie evidence of quantity. If this evidence were 
conclusive, we should have to admit that all, or almost all, qualities are 
susceptible of magnitude. The praises and reproaches addressed by 
poets to their mistresses would afford comparatives and superlatives 
of most known adjectives. But some circumspection is required in 
using evidence of this grammatical nature. There is always, I think, 
some quantitative comparison wherever a comparative or superlative 
occurs, but it is often not a comparison as regards the quality indicated 
by grammar. 

“O ruddier than the cherry, 

O sweeter than the berry, 

O nymph more bright 
Than moonshine light, M 

are lines containing three comparatives. As regards sweetness and 
brightness, we have, I think, a genuine quantitative comparison ; but as 
regards ruddiness, this may be doubted. The comparative here — and 
generally where colours are concerned — indicates, I think, not more of a 



169, 160] The range of Quantity 171 

given colour, but more likeness to a standard colour. Various shades of 
colour are supposed to be arranged in a series, such that the difference 
of quality is greater or less according as the distance in the series is 
greater or less. One of these shades is the ideal “ ruddiness,” and others 
are called more or less ruddy according as they are nearer to or further 
from this shade in the series. The same explanation applies, I think, 
to such terms as whiter , blacker , redder. The true quantity involved 
seems to be, in all these cases, a relation, namely the relation of similarity. 
The difference between two shades of colour is certainly a difference of 
quality, not merely of magnitude ; and when we say that one thing is 
redder than another, we do not imply that the two are of the same shade. 
If there were no difference of shade, we should probably say one was 
brighter than the other, which is quite a different kind of comparison. 
But though the difference of two shades is a difference of quality, yet, as 
the possibility of serial arrangement shows, this difference of quality is 
itself susceptible of degrees. Each shade of colour seems to be simple 
and unanalyzable ; but neighbouring colours in the spectrum are certainly 
more similar than remote colours. It is this that gives continuity to 
colours. Between two shades of colour, A and B y we should say, there 
is always a third colour C ; and this means that C resembles A or B 
more than B or A does. But for such relations of immediate resemblance, 
we should not be able to arrange colours in series. The resemblance 
must be immediate, since all shades of colour are unanalyzable, as appears 
from any attempt at description or definition*. Thus we have an 
indubitable case of relations which have magnitude. The difference or 
resemblance of two colours is a relation, and is a magnitude ; for it is 
greater or less than other differences or resemblances. 

160 . I have dwelt upon this case of colours, since it is one instance 
of a very important class. When any number of terms can be arranged 
in a series, it frequently happens that any two of them have a relation 
which may, in a generalized sense, be called a distance. This relation 
suffices to generate a serial arrangement, and is always necessarily a 
magnitude. In all such cases, if the terms of the series have names, and 
if these names have comparatives, the comparatives indicate, not more 
of the term in question, but more likeness to that term. Thus, if we 
suppose the time-series to be one in which there is distance, when an 
event is said to be more recent than another, what is meant is that its 
distance from the present was less than that of the other. Thus recentness 
is not itself a quality of the time or of the event. What are quantitatively 

* On the subject of the resemblances of colours, see Meinong, “Abstrahiren und 
Vergleichen,” Zeitschrift f. Psych, u. Phys. d. Sinnesoryane, Vol. xxiv, p. 72 ff. 
1 am not sure that I agree with the whole of Meitiong’s argument, but his general 
conclusion, “dass die llmfangscollective des Aelmlichen Allgemeiuheiten darstellen, 
an denen die Abstraction wenigstens unmittelbar keinen Autheil hat’* (p. 78), 
appears to me to be a correct and important logical principle. 



172 Quantity [chap, xx 

compared in such cases are relations, not qualities. The case of colours 
is convenient for illustration, because colours have names, and the 
difference of two colours is generally admitted to be qualitative. But 
the principle is of very wide application. The importance of this class 
of magnitudes, and the absolute necessity of clear notions as to their 
nature, will appear more and more as we proceed. The whole philosophy 
of space and time, and the doctrine of so-called extensive magnitudes, 
depend throughout upon a clear understanding of series and distance. 

Distance must be distinguished from mere difference or unlikeness. 
It holds only between terms in a series. It is intimately connected with 
order, and implies that the terms between which it holds have an ultimate 
and simple difference, not one capable of analysis into constituents. 
It implies also that there is a more or less continuous passage, through 
other terms belonging to the same series, from one of the distant terms 
to the other. Mere difference per se appears to be the bare minimum of 
a relation, being in fact a precondition of almost all relations. It is 
always absolute, and is incapable of degrees. Moreover it holds between 
any two terms whatever, and is hardly to be distinguished from the 
assertion that they are two. But distance holds only between the 
members of certain series, and its existence is then the source of the 
series. It is a specific relation, and it has sense; we can distinguish 
the distance of A from B from that of B from A. This last mark 
alone suffices to distinguish distance from bare difference. 

It might perhaps be supposed that, in a series in which there is 
distance, although the distance AB must be greater than or less than AC , 
yet the distance BI) need not be either greater or less than AC . For 
example, there is obviously more difference between the pleasure 
derivable from £5 and that derivable from i?100 than between that 
from £5 and that from £20. But need there be either equality or 
inequality between the difference for £1 and £20 and that for £5 and 
<£*100? This question must be answered affirmatively. For AC is 
greater or less than BC, and BC is greater or less than BD ; hence A C, 
BC and also BC, BD are magnitudes of the same kind. Hence AC, BD 
are magnitudes of the same kind, and if not identical, one must be the 
greater and the other the less. Hence, when there is distance in a series, 
any two distances are quantitatively comparable. 

It should be observed that all the magnitudes of one kind form 
a series, and that their distances, therefore, if they have distances, are 
again magnitudes. But it must not be supposed that these can, in 
general, be obtained by subtraction, or are of the same kind as the 
magnitudes whose differences they express. Subtraction depends, as a 
rule, upon divisibility, and is therefore in general inapplicable to 
indivisible quantities. The point is important, and will be treated 
in detail in the following chapter. 

Thus nearness and distance are relations which have magnitude. 



173 


160 - 162 ] The range of Quantity 

Are there any other relations having magnitude ? This may, I think, 
be doubted*. At least I am unaware of any other such relation, though 
I know no way of disproving their existence. 

161 . There is a difficult class of terms, usually regarded as mag- 
nitudes, apparently implying relations, though certainly not always 
relational. These are differential coefficients, such as velocity and 
acceleration. They must be borne in mind in all attempts to generalize 
about magnitude, but owing to their complexity they require a special 
discussion. This will be given in Part V ; and we shall then find that 
differential coefficients are never magnitudes, but only real numlxTs, or 
segments in some series. 

162 . All the magnitudes dealt with hitherto have been, strictly 
speaking, indivisible. Thus the question arises: Are there any divisible 
magnitudes ? Here I think a distinction must be made. A magnitude 
is essentially one, not many. Thus no magnitude is correctly expressed 
as a number of terms. But may not the quantity which has magnitude 
be a sum of parts, and the magnitude a magnitude of divisibility ? If so, 
every whole consisting of parts will be a single term possessed of the pro- 
perty of divisibility. The more parts it consists of, the greater is its 
divisibility. On this supposition, divisibility is a magnitude, of which we 
may have a greater or less degree; and the degree of divisibility corresponds 
exactly, in finite wholes, to the number of parts. But though the whole 
which has divisibility is of course divisible, yet its divisibility, which alone 
is strictly a magnitude, is not properly speaking divisible. The divisibility 
does not itself consist of parts, but only of the property of having parts. 
It is necessary, in order to obtain divisibility, to take the whole strictly 
as one y and to regard divisibility as its adjective. Thus although, in 
this case, we have numerical measurement, and all the mathematical 
consequences of division, yet, philosophically speaking, our magnitude is 
still indivisible. 

There are difficulties, however, in the way of admitting divisibility as 
a kind of magnitude. It seems to be not a property of the whole, but 
merely a relation to the parts. It is difficult to decide this point, but a 
good deal may be said, I think, in support of divisibility as a simple 
quality. The whole has a certain relation, which for convenience we may 
call that of inclusion, to all its parts. This relation is the same whether 
there be many parts or few ; what distinguishes a whole of many parts is 
that it has many such relations of inclusion. But it seems reasonable to 
suppose that a whple of many parts differs from a whole of few parts in 
some intrinsic respect. In fact, wholes may be arranged in a series 
according as they have more or fewer parts, and the serial arrangement 
implies, as we have already seen, some series of properties differing more 
or less from each other, and agreeing when two wholes have the same 

* Cf. Meinong, Ueber die Bedeutung dee Weber'nchen Genet zee, Hamburg and 
Leipzig, 1896, p. 23. 



174 Quantity [chap, xx 

finite number of parts, but distinct from number of parts in finite 
wholes. These properties can be none other than greater or less degrees 
of divisibility. Thus magnitude of divisibility would appear to be a 
simple property of a whole, distinct from the number of parts included 
in the whole, but correlated with it, provided this number be finite. If 
this view can lx? maintained, divisibility may be allowed to remain as a 
numerically measurable, but not divisible, class of magnitudes. In this 
class we should have to place lengths, areas and volumes, but not 
distances. At a later stage, however, we shall find that the divisibility 
of infinite wholes, in the sense in which this is not measured by cardinal 
numbers, must Ik* derived through relations in a way analogous to that 
in which distance is derived, and must be really a property of relations *. 

Thus it would appear, in any case, that all magnitudes are in- 
divisible. This is one common mark which they all possess, and so far 
as I know, it is the only one to be added to those enumerated in 
Chapter xix. Concerning the range of quantity, there seems to be no 
further general proposition. Very many simple non-relational terms 
have magnitude, the principal exceptions being colours, points, instants 
and numbers. 

163 . Finally, it is important to remember that, on the theory 
adopted in Chapter xix, a given magnitude of a given kind is a simple 
concept, having to the kind a relation analogous to that of inclusion in 
a class. When the kind is a kind of existents, such as pleasure, what 
actually exists is never the kind, but various particular magnitudes of 
the kind. Pleasure, abstractly taken, does not exist, but various amounts 
of it exist. This degree of abstraction is essential to the theory of 
quantity : there must be entities which differ from each other in nothing 
except magnitude. The grounds for the theory adopted may perhaps 
appear more clearly from a further examination of this case. 

Let us start with Bentham’s famous proposition : “ Quantity of 
pleasure being equal, pushpin is as good as poetry , n Here the qualita- 
tive difference of the pleasures is the very point of the judgment ; but in 
order to be able to say that the quantities of pleasure are equal, we 
must be able to abstract the qualitative differences, and leave a certain 
magnitude of pleasure. If this abstraction is legitimate, the qualitative 
difference must be not truly a difference of quality, but only a difference 
of relation to other terms, as, in the present case, a difference in the 
causal relation. For it is not the whole pleasurable states that are 
compared, but only — as the form of the judgment aptly illustrates — 
their quality of pleasure. If we suppose the magnitude of pleasure to 
be not a separate entity, a difficulty will arise. For the mere element of 
pleasure must be identical in the two cases, whereas we require a possible 
difference of magnitude. Hence we can neither hold that only the 
whole concrete state exists, and any part of it is an abstraction, nor that 

* See Chap, xi.vii. 



175 


162 , 163 ] The range of Quantity 

what exists is abstract pleasure, not magnitude of pleasure. Nor can we 
say : We abstract, from the whole states, the two elements magnitude 
and pleasure. For then we should not get a quantitative comparison of 
the pleasures. The two states would agree in being pleasures, and in 
being magnitudes. But this would not give us a magnitude of pleasure ; 
and it would give a magnitude to the states as a whole, which is not 
admissible. Hence we cannot abstract magnitude in general from the 
states, since as wholes they have no magnitude. And we have seen that 
we must not abstract bare pleasure, if we are to have any possibility of 
different magnitudes. Thus what we have to abstract is a magnitude of 
pleasure as a whole. This must not be analyzed into magnitude and 
pleasure, but must be abstracted as a whole. And the magnitude of 
pleasure must exist as a part of the whole pleasurable states, for it is 
only where there is no difference save at most one of magnitude that 
quantitative comparison is possible. Thus the discussion of this parti- 
cular case fully confirms the theory that every magnitude is unanalyzable, 
and has only the relation analogous to inclusion in a class to that 
abstract quality or relation of which it is a magnitude. 

Having seen that all magnitudes are indivisible, we have next to 
consider the extent to which numbers can be used to express magnitudes, 
and the nature and limits of measurement. 



CHAPTER XXL 


NUMBERS AS EXPRESSING MAGNITUDES: 
MEASUREMENT. 

164. It is one of the assumptions of educated common-sense that 
two magnitudes of the same kind must be numerically comparable. 
People are apt to say that they are thirty per cent, healthier or happier 
than they were, without any suspicion that such phrases are destitute of 
meaning. The purpose of the present chapter is to explain what is 
meant by measurement, what are the classes of magnitudes to which it 
applies, and how it is applied to those classes. 

Measurement of magnitudes is, in its most general sense, any method 
by which a unique and reciprocal correspondence is established between 
all or some of the magnitudes of a kind and all or some of the numbers, 
integral, rational, or real, as the case may be. (It might be thought 
that complex numbers ought to be included ; but what can ordy be 
measured by complex numbers is in fact always an aggregate of magni- 
tudes of different kinds, not a single magnitude.) In this general sense, 
measurement demands some one-one relation between the numbers and 
magnitudes in question — a relation which may be direct or indirect, 
important or trivial, according to circumstances. Measurement in this 
sense can be applied to very many classes of magnitudes ; to two great 
classes, distances and divisibilities, it applies, as we shall see, in a more 
important and intimate sense. 

Concerning measurement in the most general sense, there is very 
little to be said. Since the numbers form a series, and since every kind 
of magnitude also forms a series, it will be desirable that the order of 
the magnitudes measured should correspond to that of the numbers, i.e. 
that all relations of Iwtween should be the same for magnitudes and their 
measures. Wherever there is a zero, it is well that this should be 
measured by the number zero. These and other conditions, which a 
measure should fulfil if possible, may be laid down; but they are of 
practical rather than theoretical importance. 

166. There are two general metaphysical opinions, either of which, 
if accepted,- shows that all magnitudes are theoretically capable of 
measurement in the above sense. The first of these is the theoiy that 



Measurement 


177 


164-166] 

all events either are, or are correlated with, events in the dynamical 
causal series. In regard to the so-called secondary qualities, this view 
has been so far acted upon by physical science that it has provided most 
of the so-called intensive quantities that appear in space with spatial, 
and thence numerical, measures. And with regard to mental quantities 
the theory in question is that of psychophysical parallelism. Here the 
motion which is correlated with any psychical quantity always theoreti- 
cally affords a means of measuring that quantity. The other metaphysical 
opinion, which leads to universal measurability, is one suggested by 
Kant’s “Anticipations of Perception*,” namely that, among intensive 
magnitudes, an increase is always accompanied by an increase of reality. 
Reality, in this connection, seems synonymous with existence; hence 
the doctrine may be stated thus : Existence is a kind of intensive 
magnitude, of which, where a greater magnitude exists, there is always 
more than where a less magnitude exists. (That this is exactly Kant’s 
doctrine seems improbable ; but it is at least a tenable view.) In this 
case, since two instances of the same magnitude (i.e. two equal quantities) 
must have more existence than one, it follows that, if a single magnitude 
of the same kind can be found having the same amount of existence as 
the two equal quantities together, then that magnitude may be called 
double that of each of the equal quantities. In this way all intensive 
magnitudes become theoretically capable of measurement. That this 
method has any practical importance it would be absurd to maintain ; 
but it may contribute to the appearance of meaning belonging to twice 
as hapj)y. It gives a sense, for example, in which we may say that a 
child derives as much pleasure from one chocolate as from two acid 
drops ; and on the basis of such judgments the hedonistic Calculus 
could theoretically be built. 

There is one other general observation of some importance. If it be 
maintained that all series of magnitudes are either continuous in Cantor’s 
sense, or are similar to series which can be chosen out of continuous 
series, then it is theoretically possible to correlate any kind of magnitudes 
with all or some of the real numbers, so that the zeros correspond, and 
the greater magnitudes correspond to the greater numbers. But if any 
series of magnitudes, without being continuous, contains continuous 
series, then such a series of magnitudes will be strictly and theoretically 
incapable of measurement by the real numbers f. 

166. Leaving now these somewhat vague generalities, let us examine 
the more usual and concrete sense of measurement. What we require is 
some sense in which we may say that one magnitude is double of another. 


* Reine Vemunft, ed. Hart. (1867), p. 160. The wording of the first edition 
illustrates better than that of the second the doctrine to which 1 allude. See e.g . 
Erdmann’s edition, p. 161. 

t See Part V, Chap, xxxm ff. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 


INFINITY, THE INFINITESIMAL, AND CONTINUITY. 

179. Almost all mathematical ideas present one great difficulty: 
the difficulty of infinity. This is usually regarded by philosophers as 
an antinomy, and as showing that the propositions of mathematics are 
not metaphysically true. From this received opinion I am compelled to 
dissent. Although all apparent antinomies, except such as are quite 
easily disposed of, and such as l)elong to the fundamentals of logic, are, 
in my opinion, reducible to the one difficulty of infinite number, yet this 
difficulty itself appears to be soluble by a correct philosophy of any , and 
to have been generated very largely by confusions due to the ambiguity 
in the meaning of finite integers. The problem in general will be 
discussed in Part V ; the purpose of the present chapter is merely to 
show that quantity, which has been regarded as the true home of infinity, 
the infinitesimal, and continuity, must give place, in this respect, to 
order ; while the statement of the difficulties which arise in regard to 
quantity can be made in a form which is at once ordinal and arithmetical, 
but involves no reference to the special peculiarities of quantity. 

180. The three problems of infinity, the infinitesimal, and con- 
tinuity, as they occur in connection with quantity, arc closely related. 
None of them can be fully discussed at this stage, since all depend 
essentially upon order, while the infinitesimal depends also upon number. 
The question of infinite quantity, though traditionally considered more 
formidable than that of zero, is in reality far less so, and might be 
briefly disposed of, but for the great devotion commonly shown by 
philosophers to a proposition which I shall call the axiom of finitude. 
Of some kinds of magnitude (for example ratios, or distances in space 
and time), it appears to be true that there is a magnitude greater than 
any given magnitude. That is, any magnitude being mentioned, another 
can be found which is greater than it. The deduction of infinity from 
this fact is, when correctly performed, a mere fiction to facilitate com- 
pression in the statement of results obtained by the method of limits. 



179-181] Infinity, the Infinitesimal , and Continuity 189 

Any class u of magnitudes of our kind being defined, three cases may 
arise : (1) There may be a class of terms greater than any of our class w, 
and this new class of terms may have a smallest member ; (2) there may 
be such a class, but it may have no smallest member ; (3) there may be 
no magnitudes which are greater than any term of our class ?/. Suppos- 
ing our kind of magnitudes to be one in which there is no greatest 
magnitude, case (2) will always arise where the class u contains a finite 
number of terms. On the other hand, if our series be what is called 
condensed in itself, case (2) will never arise when n is an infinite class, 
and has no greatest term ; and if our series is not condensed in itself, 
but does have a term between any two, another which has this property 
can always be obtained from it*. Thus all infinite series which have 
no greatest term will have limits, except in case (3). To avoid cir- 
cumlocution, case (3) is defined as that in which the limit is infinite. 
But this is a mere device, and it is generally admitted by mathema- 
ticians to be such. Apart from special circumstances, there is no 
reason, merely because a kind of magnitudes has no maximum, to 
admit that there is an infinite magnitude of the kind, or that there 
are many such. When magnitudes of a kind having no maximum 
are capable of numerical measurement, they very often obey the axiom 
of Archimedes, in virtue of which the ratio of any two magnitudes of 
the kind is finite. Thus, so far, there might appear to be no problem 
connected with infinity. 

But at this point the philosopher is apt to step in, and to declare 
that, by all true philosophic principles, every well-defined series of terms 
must have a last term. If he insists upon creating this last term, and 
calling it infinity, he easily deduces intolerable contradictions, from which 
he infers the inadequacy of mathematics to obtain absolute truth. For 
my part, however, I see no reason for the philosopher s axiom. To show, 
if possible, that it is not a necessary philosophic principle, let us under- 
take its analysis, and see what it really involves. 

The problem of infinity, as it has now emerged, is not properly a 
quantitative problem, but rather one concerning order. It is only 
because our magnitudes form a series having no last term that the 
problem arises : the fact that the series is composed of magnitudes is 
wholly irrelevant. With this remark I might leave the subject to a 
later stage. But it will be worth while now to elicit, if not to examine, 
the philosopher's axiom of finitude. 

181. It will be well, in the first place, to show how the problem 
concerning infinity is the same as that concerning continuity and the 
infinitesimal. For this purpose, we shall find it convenient to ignore the 
absolute zero, and to mean, when we speak of any kind of magnitudes, 
all the magnitudes of the kind except zero. This is a mere change of 


* This will be further explained in Part V, Chap, xxxvi. 



190 Quantity [chap, xxiii 

diction, without which intolerable repetitions would be necessary. Now 
there certainly are some kinds of magnitude where the three following 
axioms hold : % 

(1) If A and B be any two magnitudes of the kind, and A is 
greater than B , there is always a third magnitude C such that A 
is greater than C and C greater than B. (This I shall call, for the 
present, the axiom of continuity.) 

(2) There is always a magnitude less than any given magnitude B . 

(3) There is always a magnitude greater than any given magni- 
tude A . 

From these it follows : — 

(1) That no two magnitudes of the kind are consecutive. 

(2) That there is no least magnitude. 

(3) That there is no greatest magnitude. 

The above propositions are certainly true of some kinds of magni- 
tude ; whether they are true of all kinds remains to be examined. The 
following three propositions, which directly contradict the previous three, 
must be always true, if the philosopher’s axiom of finitude is to be 
accepted : 

(a) There are consecutive magnitudes, i.e. magnitudes such that 
no other magnitude of the same kind is greater than the less and less 
than the greater of the two given magnitudes. 

( b ) There is a magnitude smaller than any other of the same kind. 

(<:) There is a magnitude greater than any other of the same 

kind*. 

As these three propositions directly contradict the previous three, it 
would seem that both sets cannot be true. We have to examine the 
grounds for both, and let one set of alternatives fall. 

182. Let us begin with the propositions (a), (6), (r), and examine 
the nature of their grounds. 

(a) A definite magnitude A being given, all the magnitudes greater 
than A form a series, whose differences from A are magnitudes of a new 
kind. If there be a magnitude B consecutive to A> its difference from A 
will lie the least magnitude of its kind, provided equal stretches cor- 
respond to equal distances in the series. And conversely, if there be 
a smallest difference between two magnitudes, A , 2?, then these two 
magnitudes must always be consecutive ; for if not, any intermediate 

* Those Hegelians who search for a chance of an antinomy may proceed to 
the definition of zero and infinity by means of the above propositions. When (2) 
and (6) both hold, they may say, the magnitude satisfying (ft) is called zero ; when 
(3) and (c) both hold, the magnitude satisfying (<?) is called infinity. We have seen, 
however, that zero is to be otherwise defined, and has to be excluded before (2) 
becomes true ; while infinity is not a magnitude of the kind in question at all, but 
merely a piece of mathematical shorthand. (Not infinity in general, that is, but 
iufinite magnitude in the cases we are diseussing.) 



181 , 182 ] Infinity , the Infinitesimal , and Continuity 191 

magnitude would have a smaller difference from A than B has. Thus 
if ( ft ) is universally true, (a) must also lx? true ; and conversely, if ( a ) is 
true, and if the series of magnitudes be such that equal stretches cor- 
respond to equal distances, then (ft) is true of the distances between the 
magnitudes considered. We might rest content with the reduction of 
(a) to (ft), and proceed to the proof of (b ) ; but it seems worth while 
to offer a direct proof, such as presumably the finitist philosopher has in 
his mind. 

Between A and B there is a certain dumber of magnitudes, unless A 
and B are consecutive. The intermediate magnitudes all have order, so 
that in passing from A to B all the intermediate magnitudes would 
be met with. In such an enumeration, there must lx .some magnitude 
which comes next after any magnitude C ; or, to put the matter other- 
wise, since the enumeration has to begin, it must begin somewhere, and 
the term with which it begins must be the magnitude next to A. If 
this were not the case, there would be no definite series ; for if all the 
terms have an order, some of them must be consecutive. 

In the above argument, what is important is its dependence upon 
number. The whole argument turns upon the principle by which infinite 
number is shown to be self-contradictory, namely : A given collection 
of many terms must contain some finite numlter of terms . We say : All 
the magnitudes between A and B form a given collection. If there 
are no such magnitudes, A and B are consecutive, and the question 
is decided. If there are such magnitudes, there must be a finite 
number of them, say n. Since they form a series, there is a definite 
way of assigning to them the ordinal numbers from 1 to n. The with 
and (wi+l)th are then consecutive. 

If the axiom in italics be denied, the whole argument collapses ; and 
this, we shall find, is also the case as regards (ft) and (c). 

(ft) The proof here is precisely similar to the proof of (a). If there 
are no magnitudes less than A , then A is the least of its kind, and the 
question is decided. If there are any, they form a definite collection, 
and therefore (by our axiom) have a finite number, say n. Since they 
form a series, ordinal numbers may be assigned to them growing higher 
as the magnitudes become more distant from A. Thus the nth magni- 
tude is the smallest of its kind. 

(c) The proof here is obtained as in (ft), by considering the collection 
of magnitudes greater than A. Thus everything depends upon our 
axiom, without which no case can be made out against continuity, or 
against the absence of a greatest and least magnitude. 

As regards the axiom itself, it will be seen that it has no particular 
reference to quantity, and at first sight it might seem to have no 
reference to order. But the word finite , which occurs in it, requires 
definition; and this definition, in the form suited to the present dis* 
cuss ion, has, we shall find, an essential reference to order. 



192 Quantity [chap, xxra 

183 . Of all the philosophers who have inveighed against infinite 
number, I doubt whether there is one who has known the difference 
between finite and infinite numbers. The difference is simply this. 
Finite numbers obey the law of mathematical induction ; infinite 
numbers do not. That is to say, given any number w, if n belongs 
to every class ,y to which 0 belongs, and to which belongs also the 
number next after any number which is an .v, then n is finite ; if not, 
not. It is in this alone y and in its consequences, that finite and infinite 
numbers differ*. 

The principle may be otherwise stated thus: If every proposition 
which holds concerning 0, and also holds concerning the immediate 
successor of every number of which it holds, holds concerning the number 
n, then n is finite ; if not, not. This is the precise sense of what may be 
popularly expressed by saying that every finite number can be reached 
from 0 by successive steps, or by successive additions of 1. This is the 
principle which the philosopher must be held to lay down as obviously 
applicable to all numbers, though he will have to admit that the more 
precisely his principle is stated, the less obvious it becomes. 

184 . It may be worth while to show exactly how mathematical 
induction enters into the above proofs. Let us take the proof of (a), 
and suppose there are n magnitudes between A and B. Then to begin 
with, we supposed these magnitudes capable of enumeration, i.e. of an 
order in which there are consecutive terms and a first term, and a term 
immediately preceding any term except the first. This property pre- 
supposes mathematical induction, and was in fact the very property in 
dispute. Hence we must not presuppose the possibility of enumeration, 
which would be a petitio principii. But to come to the kernel of the 
argument : we supposed that, in any series, there must be a definite way 
of assigning ordinal numbers to the terms. This property belongs to 
a series of one term, and belongs to every series having m + 1 terms, 
if it belongs to every series having m terms. Hence, by mathematical 
induction, it belongs to all series having a finite number of terms. But 
if it be allowed that the number of terms may not be finite, the whole 
argument collapses. 

As regards (6) and (r), the argument is similar. Every series having 
a finite number of terms can be shown by mathematical induction to 
have a first and last term ; but no way exists of proving this concerning 
other series, or of proving that all series are finite. Mathematical 
induction, in short, like the axiom of parallels, is useful and convenient 
in its proper place ; but' to suppose it always true is to yield to the 


* It must, however, be mentioned that one of these consequences gives a logical 
difference between finite and infinite numbers, which may be taken as an inde- 
pendent definition. This has been already explained in Part II, Chap, xiix, and will 
be further discussed in Part V. 



183-185] Infinity , the Infinitesimal , and Continuity 193 

tyranny of mere prejudice. The philosopher's finitist arguments, there- 
fore, rest on a principle of which he is ignorant, which there is no reason 
to affirm, and every reason to deny. With this conclusion, the apparent 
antinomies may be considered solved. 

185. It remains to consider what kinds of magnitude satisfy the 
propositions (1), (2), (3). There is no general principle from which 
these can be proved or disproved, but there are certainly cases where 
they are true, and others where they are false. It is generallv held by 
philosophers that numbers are essentially discrete, while magnitudes are 
essentially continuous. This we shall find to be not the case. Heal 
numbers possess the most complete continuity known, while many kinds 
of magnitude possess no continuity- at all. The word continuity has 
many meanings, but in mathematics it has only two — one old, the other 
new. For present purposes the old meaning will suffice. I therefore 
set up, for the present, the following definition : 

Continuity applies to series (and only to series) whenever these are 
such that there is a term between any two given terms*. Whatever is 
not a series, or a compound of series, or whatever is a series not fulfilling 
the above condition, is discontinuous. 

Thus the series of rational numbers is continuous, for the arithmetic 
mean of two of them is always a third rational number between the two. 
The letters of the alphabet are not continuous. 

We have seen that any two terms in a series have a distance, or a 
stretch which has magnitude. Since there are certainly discrete series 
(e.g. the alphabet), there are certainly discrete magnitudes, namely, the 
distances or the stretches of terms in discrete series. The distance 
between the letters A and C is greater than that between the letters 
A and B , but there is no magnitude which is greater than one of these 
and less than the other. In this case, there is also a greatest possible 
and a least possible distance, so that all three propositions (1), (2), (3) 
fail. It must not be supposed, however, that the three propositions 
have any necessary connection. In the case of the integers, for example, 
there are consecutive distances, and there is a least possible distance, 
namely, that between consecutive integers, but there is no greatest 
possible distance. Thus (3) is true, while (1) and (2) are false. In 
the case of the series of notes, or of colours of the rainbow, the series 
has a beginning and end, so that there is a greatest distance ; but there 
is no least distance, and there is a term between any two. Thus (1) 
and (2) are true, while (3) is false. Or again, if we take the series 
composed of zero and the fractions having one for numerator, there is a 

* The objection to this definition (as we shall see in Part V) is, that it does not 
give the usual properties of the existence of limits to convergent series which are 
commonly associated with continuity. Series of the above kind will be called 
compact , except in the present discussion. 



194 Quantity [chap, xxm 

greatest distance, but no least distance, though the series is discrete- 
Thus (2) is true, while (1) and (3) are false. And other combinations 
might be obtained from other series. 

Thus the three propositions (1), (2), (3), have no necessary connection, 
and all of them, or any selection, may be false as applied to any given 
kind of magnitude. We cannot hope, therefore, to prove their truth 
from the nature of magnitude. If they are ever to be true, this must be 
proved independently, or discovered by mere inspection in each particular 
case. That they are sometimes true, appears from a consideration of 
the distances between terms of the number-continuum or of the rational 
numbers. Either of these series is continuous in the above sense, and 
has no first or last term (when zero is excluded)* Hence its distances 
or stretches fulfil all three conditions. The same might be inferred 
from space and time, but I do not wish to anticipate what is to be said 
of these. Quantities of divisibility do not fulfil these conditions when 
the wholes which are divisible consist of a finite number of indivisible 
parts. But where the number of parts is infinite in a whole class of 
differing magnitudes, all three conditions are satisfied, as appeal's from 
the properties of the number-continuum. 

We thus see that the problems of infinity and continuity have no 
essential connection with quantity, but are due, where magnitudes 
present them at all, to characteristics depending upon number and 
order. Hence the discussion of these problems can only be undertaken 
after the pure theory of order has been set forth*. To do this will 
be the aim of the following Part. 

186. We may now sum up the results obtained in Part III. In 
Chapter xix we determined to define a magnitude as whatever is either 
greater or less than something else. We found that magnitude has no 
necessary connection with divisibility, and that greater and less are inde- 
finable. Every magnitude, we saw, has a certain relation — analogous to, 
but not identical with, that of inclusion in a class — to a certain quality 
or relation ; and this fact is expressed by saying that the magnitude 
in question is a magnitude of that quality or relation. We defined a 
quantity as a particular contained under a magnitude, i.e. as the complex 
consisting of a magnitude with a certain spatio-temporal position, or with 
a pair of terms between which it is a relation. We decided, by means of 
a general principle concerning transitive symmetrical relations, that 
it is impossible to content ourselves with quantities, and deny the 
further abstraction involved in magnitudes; that equality is not a direct 
relation between quantities, but consists in being particularizations of 
the same magnitude. Thus equal quantities are instances of the same 


* Cf. Couturat, “ Sur la Definition du Continn Revue de Metaphysique e t de 
\rale. 1900. 



185, 186] Infinity, the Infinitesimal, and Continuity 195 

magnitude. Similarly greater and less are not direct relations between 
quantities, but between magnitudes : quantities are only greater and 
less in virtue of being instances of greater and less magnitudes. Any 
two magnitudes which are of the same quality or relation are one 
greater, the other less ; and greater and less are asymmetrical transitive 
relations. 

Among the terms which have magnitude are not only many qualities, 
but also asymmetrical relations by which certain kinds of series are 
constituted. These may be called distances. When there are distances 
in a series, any two terms of the series have a distance, which is the same 
as, greater than, or less than, the distance of any two other terms in the 
series. Another peculiar class of magnitudes discussed in Chapter xx is 
constituted by the degrees of divisibility of different wholes. This, we 
found, is the only case in which quantities are divisible, while there is no 
instance of divisible magnitudes. 

Numerical measurement, which was discussed in Chapter xxi, required, 
owing to the decision that most quantities and all magnitudes are in- 
divisible, a somewhat unusual treatment. The problem lies, we found, 
in establishing a one-one relation between numbers and the magnitudes 
of the kind to be measured. On certain metaphysical hypotheses (which 
were neither accepted nor rejected), this was found to be always theo- 
retically possible as regards existents actual or possible, though often 
not practically feasible or important. In regard to two classes of 
magnitudes, namely divisibilities and distances, measurement was found 
to proceed from a very natural convention, which defines what is 
meant by saying (what can never have the simple sense which it has in 
connection with finite wholes and parts) that one such magnitude is 
double of, or n times, another. The relation of distance to stretch 
was discussed, and it was found that, apart from a special axiom to 
that effect, there was no a priori reason for regarding equal distances as 
corresponding to equal stretches. 

In Chapter xxn we discussed the definition of zero. The problem 
of zero was found to have no connection with that of the infini- 
tesimal, being in fact closely related to the purely logical problem 
as to the nature of negation. W e decided that, just as there are the 
distinct logical and arithmetical negations, so there is a third funda- 
mental kind, the quantitative negation ; but that this is negation of 
that quality or relation of which the magnitudes are, not of magnitude 
of that quality or relation. Hence we were able to regard zero as one 
among the magnitudes contained in a kind of magnitude, and to dis- 
tinguish the zeroes of different kinds. We showed also that quantitative 
negation is connected with logical negation by the fact that there cannot 
be any quantities whose magnitude is zero. 

In the present Chapter the problems of continuity, the infinite, and 
the infinitesimal, were shown to belong, not specially to the theory of 



106 


Quantity [chap, xxm 

quantity, but to those of number and order. It was shown that, though 
there are kinds of magnitude in which there is no greatest and no least 
magnitude, this fact does not require us to admit infinite or infinitesimal 
magnitudes ; and that there is no contradiction in supposing a kind of 
magnitudes to form a series in which there is a term between any two, 
and in which, consequently, there is no term consecutive to a given term. 
The supposed contradiction was shown to result from an undue use of 
mathematical induction— a principle, the full discussion of which pre- 
supposes the philosophy of order. 



PART 


IV. 


ORDER. 




CHAPTER XXIV. 


THE GENESIS OF SERIES. 


187. Thk notion of order or series is one with which, in connection 
with distance, and with the order of magnitude, we have already 
had to deal. The discussion of continuity in the last chapter of 
Part III showed us that this is properly an ordinal notion, and 
prepared us for the fundamental importance of order. It is now high 
time to examine this concept on its own account. The importance of 
order, from a purely mathematical standpoint, has been immeasurably 
increased by many modern developments. Dedekind, Cantor, and Peano 
have shown how to base all Arithmetic and Analysis upon series of a 
certain kind — i.c. upon those properties of finite numbers in virtue 
of which they form what I shall call a progression. Irrationals are 
defined (as we shall see) entirely by the help of order; and a new* 
class of transfinitc ordinals is introduced, by which the most important 
and interesting results are obtained. In Geometry, von Staudt’s quadri- 
lateral construction and Picri’s work on Projective Geometry have shown 
how to give points, lines, and planes an order independent of metrical 
considerations and of quantity ; while descriptive Geometry proves that 
a very large part of Geometry demands only the possibility of serial 
arrangement. Moreover the whole philosophy of space and time depends 
upon the view we take of order. Thus a discussion of order, which 
is lacking in the current philosophies, has become essential to any 
understanding of the foundations of mathematics. 

188. The notion of order is more complex than any hitherto 
analyzed. Two terms cannot have an order, and even three cannot 
have a cyclic order. Owing to this complexity, the logical analysis 
of order presents considerable difficulties. I shall therefore approach 
the problem gradually, considering, in this chapter, the circumstances 
under which order arises, and reserving for the second chapter the 
discussion as to what order really is. This analysis will raise several 
fundamental points in general logic, which will demand considerable 
discussion of an almost purely philosophical nature. From this I shall 
pass to more mathematical topics, such as the types of series and 



200 Order [chap, xxiv 

the ordinal definition of numbers, thus gradually preparing the way for 
the discussion of infinity and continuity in the following Part: 

There are two different ways in which order may arise, though we 
shall find in the end that the second way is reducible to the first. In 
the first, what may be called the ordinal element consists of three terms 
a, ft, c, one of which ( ft say) is between the other two. This happens 
whenever there is a relation of a to b and of b to c, which is not a 
relation of b to a , of c to ft, or of c to a . This is the definition, or 
better perhaps, the necessary and sufficient condition, of the proposition 
“ b is between a and ej n Hut there are other cases of order where, at 
first sight, the above conditions are not satisfied, and where between 
is not obviously applicable. These are cases where we have four terms 
a, ft, c, d, as the ordinal element, of which we can say that a and c are 
separated by ft and d. This relation is more complicated, but the 
following seems to characterize it : a and c are separated from ft and d, 
when there is an asymmetrical relation which holds between a and ft, 
ft and c, c and d, or between a and d, d and c, c and ft, or between 
c and d, d and a, a and ft ; while if we have the first case, the same 
relation must hold either between d and a , or else between both a 
and c, and a and d; with similar assumptions for the other two cases*. 
(No further special assumption is required as to the rclatio . between 
a and c or between ft and d; it is the absence of such an assumption 
which prevents our reducing this case to the former in a simple manner.) 
There are cases — notably where our series is closed — in which it .seem* 
formally impossible to reduce this second case to the first, though this 
appearance, as we shall see, is in part deceptive. We have to show, 
in the present chapter, the principal ways in which series arise from 
collections of such ordinal elements. 

Although two terms alone cannot have an order, we must not 
assume that order is possible except where there are relations l>etween 
two terms. In all series, we shall find, there are asymmetrical relations 
between two terms. Hut an asymmetrical relation of which there is 
only one instance does not constitute order. We require at least two 
instances for between , and at least three for separation of pairs. Thus 
although order is a relation between three or four terms, it is only 
possible where there are other relations which hold between pairs of 
terms. These relations may \yc of various kinds, giving different ways 
of generating series. I shall now enumerate the principal ways with 
which I am acquainted. 

189. (1) The simplest method of generating a series is as follows. 

Let there be a collection of terms, finite or infinite, such that every 
term (with the possible exception of a single one) has to one and only 

* This gives a sufficient but not a necessary condition for the separation 
of couples. 



201 


188 , 189 ] The Genesis of Series 

one other term of the collection a certain asymmetrical relation (which 
must of course be intransitive), and that every term (with again one 
possible exception, which must not be the same as the term formerly 
excepted) has also to one and only one other term of the collection 
the relation which is the converse of the former one* * * § . Further, let 
it be assumed that, if a has the first relation to 6, and b to c, then c 
does not have the first relation to a. Then every term of the collection 
except the two peculiar terms has one relation to a second term, and 
the converse relation to a third, while these terms themselves do not 
have to each other either of the relations in question. Consequently, 
by the definition of between^ our first term is between our second and 
third terms. The term to which a given term has one of the two 
relations in question is called next after the given term ; the term to 
which the given term has the converse relation is called next bejore 
the given term. Two terms l>etween which the relations in question 
hold are called comeeutive. The exceptional terms (when they exist) 
are not between any pair of terms ; they are calk'd the two ends of 
the series, or one is called the beginning and the other the end. The 
existence of the one does not imply that of the other— for example 
the natural numbers have a beginning but no end — and neither need 
exist — for example, the positive and negative integers together have 
neither f. 

The above method may perhaps become clear by a formal exhibition. 
Let R be one of our relations, and let its converse be denoted by R\. 
Then if e be any term of our set, there are two terms r/, J\ such that 
e R r/, e Rf> i.e. such that d R e, e Rf Since each term only has the 
relation R to one other, we cannot have d R f \ and it was one of 

the initial assumptions that we were not to have f R d. Hence e is 

between d and t /‘ §. If a be a term which has only the relation R y then 
obviously a is not between any pair of terms. We may extend the 
notion of between by defining that, if c be between b and c/, and d 

between c and c, then e or d will be said to be also between b and e. 

In this way, unless we either reach an end or come back to the term 
with which we started, we can find any number of terms between which 
and b the term c will lie. But if the total number of terms be not 
less than seven, we cannot show in this way that of any three terms 
one must be between the other two, since the collection may consist 


* The converse of a relation is the relation which must hold between y and x 
when the given relation holds between x and y. 

t The above is the only method of generating series given by Bolzano, u Para- 
doxien des (Jnendlichen,” § 7. 

I 'lliis is the notation adopted by Professor Schroder. 

§ The denial of d Rf is only necessary to this special method, but the denial ot 
fR d is essential to the definition of between. 



Order 


202 


[CHAP. XXIV 


of two distinct series, of which, if the collection is finite, one at least 
must be closed, in order to avoid more than two ends. 

This remark shows that, if the above method is to give a single 
series, to which any term of our collection is to belong, we need a 
further condition, which may be expressed by saying that the collection 
must be connected . We shall find means hereafter of expressing this 
condition without reference to number, but for the present we may 
content ourselves by saying that our collection is connected when, given 
any two of its terms, there is a certain finite number (not necessarily 
unique) of steps from one term to the next, by w'hich we can pass 
from one of our two terms to the other. When this condition is 
fulfilled, we are assured that, of any three terms of our collection, one 
must be between the other two. 

Assuming now that our collection is connected, and therefore forms 
a single series, four cases may arise : (a) our series may have two ends, 
(ft) it may have one end, (c) it may have no end and be open, (d) it may 
have no end and be closed. Concerning (a), it is to be observed that 
our series must be finite. For, taking the two ends, since the collection 
is connected, there is some finite number n of steps which will take 
us from one end to the other, and hence n -f 1 is the number of terms 
of the series. Every term except the two ends is between them, and 
neither of them is between any other pair of terms. In case (ft), on 
the other hand, our collection must be infinite, and this would hold 
even if it were not connected. For suppose the end which exists to 
have the relation R , but not R. Then every other term of the collection 
has both relations, and can never have both to the same term, since R 
is asymmetrical. Hence the term to w'hich (say) e has the relation R is 
not that to which it had the relation R , but is either some new' term, 
or one of c s predecessors. Now it cannot be the end-term «, since 

a does not have the relation R to any term. Nor can it be any term 
which can be reached by successive steps from a without passing 
through e , for if it were, this term would have two predecessors, 

contrary to the hypothesis that A is a one-one relation. Hence, if 

k be any term which can be reached by successive steps from a, 
Jc has a successor which is not a or any of the terms between a 

and k ; and hence the collection is infinite, whether it be connected 

or not. In case (r), the collection must again be infinite. For here, 
by hypothesis, the scries is open — i.e., starting from any term e , no 
number of steps in either direction brings us back to e. And there, 
cannot be a finite limit to the number of possible steps, since, if there 
were, the series would have an end. Here again, it is not necessary to 
suppose the series connected. In case (d), on the contrary, we must 
assume connection. By saying that the series is closed, we mean that 
there exists some number n of steps by which, starting from a certain 



203 


189, 190] The Genesis of Series 

term a, we shall be brought back to a. In this case, n is the number 
of terms, and it makes no difference with which term we start. In this 
case, between is not definite except where three terms are consecutive, 
and the series contains more than three terms. Otherwise, we need the 
more complicated relation of separation. 

190. (2) The above method, as we have seen, will give either open 
or closed series, but only such as have consecutive terms. The second 
method, which is now to be discussed, will give series in which there 
are no consecutive terms, but will not give closed series*. In this 
method we have a transitive asymmetrical relation /*, and a collection 
of terms any two of which are such that either xPy or yPi r. When 
these conditions are satisfied our terms necessarily form a single series. 
Since the relation is asymmetrical, we can distinguish aPy from yPx 9 
and the two cannot both subsist f. Since P is transitive, xPy and yPz 
involve xPz. It follows that P is also asymmetrical and transitive^. 
Thus with respect to any term x of’ our collection, all other terms of 
the collection fall into two classes, those for which aPy, and those for 
which zPx. Calling these two classes ttx and ttx respectively, we see 
that, owing to the transitiveness of if y belongs to the class 7 nr, 
Try is contained in 77\r; and if z belongs to the class t ra\ ttz is contained 
in 7 rx. Taking now two terms .r, for which xPy, all other terms fall 
into three classes: (1) Those belonging to i rx, and therefore to Try ; 
(2) those belonging to Try. and therefore to ttx ; (3) those belonging to 
ttx but not to Try. If z be of the first class, we have zPx, zPy ; if v be 
of the second, xPv and yPv ; if w be of the third, xPw and wPy. The 
case yPu and uPx is excluded : for xPy , yPu imply xPu, which is in- 
consistent with uPx. Thus we have, in the three cases, (1) x is between 
z and y ; (2) y is between x and v ; (3) w is between x and y. Hence 
any three terms of our collection arc such that one is between the other 
two, and the whole collection forms a single series. If the class (3) 
contains no terms, x and y are said to be consecutive ; but many rela- 
tions P can be assigned, for which there arc always terms in the class (3). 
If for example P be before , and our collection be the moments in a 

* The following method is the only one given by Vivanti in the Formulaire de 
Muthrmaliques, ( 1805 ), vi, § 2, No. 7 ; also by Gilman, “On the properties of a one- 
dimensional manifold,” Mind y N.S. Vol. i. We shall find that it is general in 
a sense in which none of our other methods are so. 

t 1 use the term asymmetrical as the contrary, rather than the contradictory, 
of symmetrical. If .r/ty, and the relation is symmetrical, we have always yPx ; if 
asymmetrical, we never have yPx. Some relations— e.g. logical implication— are 
neither symmetrical nor asymmetrical. Instead of assuming P to be asymmetrical, 
we may make the equivalent assumption that it is what Professor Peirce calls an 
a/iorelative, i.e. a relation which no term has to itself. (This assumption is not 
equivalent to asymmetry in general, but only when combined with transitiveness.) 

I P may be read precedes , and P may be read follows , provided no temporal or 
spatial ideas are allowed to intrude themselves. 



204 Order [chap, xxiv 

certain interval, or in all time, there is a moment between any two of 
our collection. Similarly in the case of the magnitudes which, in the 
last chapter of Part III, we called continuous. There is nothing in 
the present method, as there was in the first, to show that there must 
be consecutive terms, unless the total number of terms in our collection 
be finite. On the other hand, the present method will not allow closed 
series ; for owing to the transitiveness of the relation P, if the series 
were closed, and x were any one of its terms, we should have xPx , which 
is impossible because P is asymmetrical. Thus in a closed series, the 
generating relation can never be transitive*. As in the former method, 
the series may have two ends, or one, or none. In the first case only, 
it may be finite ; but even in this case it may be infinite, and in the 
other two cases it must be so. 

191. (3) A series may be generated by means of distances, as was 
already partially explained in Part III, and as we shall see more fully 
hereafter. In this case, starting with a certain term x y we are to have 
relations, which are magnitudes, between x and a number of other terms 

t/, z According as these relations are greater or less, we can order 

the corresponding terms. If there are no similar relations between the 
remaining terms y, z, ..., we require nothing further. Put. if these 
have relations which are magnitudes of the same kind, certain axioms 
are necessary to insure that the order may be independent of the 
particular term from which we start. Denoting by xz the distance of 
x and if xz is less than xu\ we must have yz less than yu\ A con- 
sequence, which did not follow when x was the only term that had 
a distance, is that the distances must be asymmetrical relations, and 
those which have one sense must be considered less than zero. Por 
“ xz is less than xw ” must involve “ zcz is less than zczv* i.c. zcz is less 
than 0. In this way the present case is practically reduced to the 
second ; for every pair of terms x, y will be such that xy is less than 0 
or else xy is greater than 0 ; and we may put in the first case yPx y 
in the second xPy. But we require one further axiom in order that 
the arrangement may be thus effected unambiguously. If xz = yzc\ and 
zw' = xy, w and zc must be the same point. With this further axiom, 
the reduction to case (2) becomes complete. 

192. (4) Cases of triangular relations are capable of giving rise to 
order. Let there be a relation R which holds between y and ( x , z) 9 
between z and (?/, u) 9 between u and (z 9 w) 9 and so on. Betzveen is itself 
such a relation, and this might therefore seem the most direct and 
natural way of generating order. We should say, in such a case, that y 
is between x and z 9 when the relation 1{ holds between y and the couple 
x 9 z, We should need assumptions concerning R which should show 
that, if y is between x and z 9 and z between y and zt\ then y and z are 


* For more precise statements, see Chap. xxvm. 



205 


190 - 194 ] The Genesis of Series 

each between x and w. That is, if we have yR ( x , s), zR (y y re), we must 
have yR (x, w) and zR (x, w). This is a kind of three-term transitiveness. 
Also if y be between x and zc\ and z between y and ?c, then z must be 
between x and zo, and y between x and z : that is, if yR (, x , zv) and 
zR(y, w), then zR (x, r c) and yR(x , z). Also yR(x , z) must be equi- 
valent to yR ( z , .r)*. With these assumptions, an unambiguous order 
will be generated among any number of terms such that any triad has 
the relation R. Whether such a state of things can ever be incapable of 
further analysis, is a question which I leave for the next chapter. 

193 . (5) We have found hitherto no way of generating closed 
continuous series. There are, however, instances of such series, eg. 
angles, the elliptic straight line, the complex numbers with a given 
modulus. It is therefore necessary to have some theory which allows of 
their possibility. In the case where our terms are asymmetrical relations, 
as straight lines are, or are correlated uniquely and reciprocally with 
such relations, the following theory will effect this object. In other 
cases, the sixth method (below) seems adequate to the end in view. 

Let x, y, z... be a set of asymmetrical relations, and let R be an 
asymmetrical relation which holds between any two x y y or y 9 x except 
when y is the converse relation to x. Also let R be such that, if it holds 
between x and «/, it holds between y and the converse of x ; and if x be 
any term of the collection, let all the terms to which x has either of the 
relations /f, R be terms of the collection. All these conditions are 
satisfied by angles, and whenever they are satisfied, the resulting series is 
closed. For xRy implies yRx, and hence xRy, and thence yRx; so 
that by means of relations R it is possible to travel from x back to x . 
Also there is nothing in the definition to show that our series cannot be 
continuous. Since it is closed, we cannot apply universally the notion of 
between ; but the notion of separation can be always applied. The 
reason why it is necessary to suppose that our terms either are, or are 
correlated with, asymmetrical relations, is, that such series often have 
antipodes, opposite terms as they may be called ; and that the notion of 
opposite seems to be essentially bound up with that of the converse of an 
asymmetrical relation. 

194 . (6) In the same way in which, in (4), we showed how to 
construct a series by relations of between , we can construct a series 
directly by four-term relations of separation. For this purpose, as 
before, certain axioms are necessary. The following five axioms have 
been shown by Vailatif to be sufficient, and by Padoa to possess ordered 
independence, i.e. to be such that none can be deduced from its pre- 
decessors J. Denoting “a and b separate c from d” by ah || a/, we must 
have : 

* See PeanOj J Principii di Geometria , Turin , 1889, Axioms viu, ix, x, xi. 

t Rivista di Matematica, v, pp. 76, 186. J Ibid. p. 185. 



206 


Order 


[chap, xxiv 


(a) ab || cd is equivalent to cd || ab ; 

(ft) ab || cd is equivalent to ab jj dc ; 

(7) ab j| cd excludes ac || bd ; 

($) For any four terms of our collection, we must have ab\\cd 9 or 
ac || bd, or ad || be ; 

(f) If ab || cd, and ac: || be , then ac || de. 

By means of these five assumptions, our terms a , b , c, d, e . . . acquire 
an unambiguous order, in which we start from a relation between two 
pairs of terms, which is undefined except to the extent to which the 
above assumptions define it. The further consideration of this case, as 
generally of the relation of separation, I postpone to a later stage. 

The above six methods of generating series are the principal ones 
with which I am acquainted, and all other methods, so far as I know, 
are reducible to one of these six. The last alone gives a method of 
generating closed continuous series whose terms neither are, nor are 
correlated with, asymmetrical relations*. This last method should there- 
fore be applied in projective and elliptic Geometry, where the correlation 
of the points on a line with the lines through a point appears to be 
logically subsequent to the order of the points on a line. But before we 
can decide whether these six methods (especially the fourth and sixth) 
are irreducible and independent, we must discuss (what has not hitherto 
been analyzed) the meaning of order, and the logical constituents (if any) 
of which this meaning is compounded. This will be done in the following 
chapter. 


* See Chap. xxvm. 



CHAPTER XXV. 


THE MEANING OF ORDER. 

195. We have now seen under what circumstances there is an order 
among a set of terms, and by this means we have acquired a certain 
inductive familiarity with the nature of order. Rut we have not yet 
faced the question : What is order ? This is a difficult question, and 
one upon which, so far as I know, nothing at all has been written. All 
the authors with whom I am acquainted are content to exhibit the 
genesis of order; and since most of them give only one of the six 
methods enumerated in Chapter xxiv, it is easy for them to confound the 
genesis of order with its nature. This confusion is rendered evident to 
us by the multiplicity of the above methods ; for it is evident that we 
mean by order something perfectly definite, which, being generated 
equally in all our six cases, is clearly distinct from each and all of the 
ways in which it may be generated, unless one of these ways should turn 
out to be fundamental, and the others to be reducible to it. To elicit 
this common element in all series, and to broach the logical discussions 
connected with it, is the purpose of the present chapter. This discussion 
is of purely philosophical interest, and might be wholly omitted in a 
mathematical treatment of the subject. 

In order to approach the subject gradually, let us separate the 
discussion of between from that of separation of couples. When we have 
decided upon the nature of each of these separately, it will be time to 
combine them, and examine what it is that both have in common. 
I shall begin with between , as being the simpler of the two. 

196. Between may be characterized (as in Chapter xxiv) as a relation 
of one term y to two others x and z, which holds whenever x has to y, and 
y has to z, some relation which y does not have to x, nor z toy, nor z to x*. 

* The condition that z does not have to x the relation in question is comparatively 
inessential, being only required in order that, if y be between x and z, we may not 
have x between y and z, or z between x and y. If we are willing to allow that in 
such cases, for example, as the angles of a triangle, each is between the other two, 
we may drop the condition in question altogether. The other four conditions, on 
the contrary, seem more essential. 



208 


Order 


[chap, xxv 

These conditions are undoubtedly sufficient for betweenness, but it may 
be questioned whether they are necessary. Several possible opinions 
must be distinguished in this respect. (1) We may hold that the above 
conditions give the very meaning of between, that they constitute an 
actual analysis of it, and not merely a set of conditions insuring its 
presence. (2) We may hold that between is not a relation of the terms 
x y y , z at all, but a relation of the relation of y to x to that of y to z y 
namely the relation of difference of sense. (3) We may hold that 
between is an indefinable notion, like greater and less; that the above 
conditions allow us to infer that y is between x and z y but that there 
may be other circumstances under which this occurs, and even that it 
may occur without involving any relation except diversity among the 
pairs ( x , y\ (?/, z) y (x, z). In order to decide between these theories, it 
will be well to develop each in turn. 

197. (1) In this theory, we define “y is between x and z” to mean : 
“ There is a relation R such that x Ry y yRz but not yRi r, zRy " ; and it 
remains a question whether we are to add “ not zRxT We will suppose 
to begin with that this addition is not made. The following propositions 
will be generally admitted to be self-evident: (a) If y be between x and z y 
and z between y and w , then y is between x and w ; (#) if y be between 
x and z , and zc between x and y, then y is between w and z. For brevity, 
let us express u y is between x and z” by the symbol xyz. Then our two 
propositions are : (a) xyz and yzw imply xyw ; (y8) xyz and xzvy imply 
zvyz. We must add that the relation of betzceen is symmetrical so far as 
the extremes are concerned : i.e. xyz implies zyx. This condition follows 
directly from our definition. With regard to the axioms (a) and (/3), it 
is to be observed that betzceen , on our present view, is always relative to 
some relation If, and that the axioms are only assumed to hold when it 
is the same relation if that is in question in both the premisses. Let us 
see whether these axioms are consequences of our definition. For this 
purpose, let us write R for not - R . 

xyz means xRy y yRz , yRx y zRy. 

yzzc means yRz y zRzc\ zRy y zcRz. 

Thus yzzc only adds to xyz the two conditions zRw , wRz. If R is 
transitive, these conditions insure xyzc ; if not, not. Now we have seen 
that some series are generated by one-one relations R y which are not 
transitive. In these eases, however, denoting by R 2 the relation between 
x and z implied by xRy , yRz, and so on for higher powers, we can 
substitute a transitive relation R' for if, where R’ means “some positive 
power of RT In this way, if xyz holds for a relation which is some 
definite power of If, then xyz holds for If', provided only that no positive 

power of R is equivalent to If. For, in this latter event, we should 
have yR f x whenever xR'y, and If' could not be substituted for R in the 
explanation of xyz . Now this condition, that the converse of If is not 



209 


196 , 197 ] The meaning of Order 

to be a positive power of i?, is equivalent to the condition that our 
series is not to be closed. For if R — /?**, then RR= R "* 1 ; but since R 

is a one-one relation, RR implies the relation of identity. Thus » + l 
steps bring us back from x to x 9 and our scries is a closed series of 
n 4* 1 terms. Now we have agreed already that between is not properly 

applicable to closed series. Hence this condition, that R is not to 
be a power of R , imposes only such restrictions upon our axiom (a) as 
we should expect it to lx‘ subject to. 

With regard to (#), we have 
.77/:: = xRy . yRz . yRx . zRy. 
xwy = xRw . icRy . wRx . yRiv. 

The case contemplated by this axiom is only possible if R be not 
a one-one relation, since we have xRy and xRw. The deduction xvyz 
is here an immediate consequence of the definition, without the need of 
any further conditions. 

It remains to examine whether we can dispense with the condition 
zRx in the definition of between. If we suppose R to be a one-one 
relation, and zRx to be satisfied, we shall have 

xyz = xRy . yRz . zRy . yRa\ 

and we have further by hypothesis zR« r, and since R is one -one, and 
a Ry, we have .rite. Hence, in virtue of the definition, we have yzx ; 
and similarly we shall obtain zxy. If we now adhere to our axiom (a), 
we shall have xzx, which is impossible; for it is certainly part of the 
meaning of between that the three terms in the relation should be 
different, and it is impossible that a term should be between x and x. 
Thus we must either insert our condition zRx, or we must set up the 
new condition in the definition, that x and z are to be different. (It 
should be observed that our definition implies that x is different from y 
and y from z ; for if not, xRy w ould involve yRx y and yRz would 
involve zRy.) It would seem preferable to insert the condition that x 
and z are to be different : for this is in any case necessary, and is not 
implied by zRx. This condition must then be added to our axiom (a) ; 
xyz and yzw are to imply xf/u\ unless x and w are identical. In axiom 
(/8), this addition is not necessary, since it is implied in the premisses. 
Thus the condition zRx is not necessary, if we arc willing to admit that 
xyz is compatible with yzx — an admission which such cases as the 
angles of a triangle render possible. Or we may insert, in place of 
zRx, the condition which we found necessary before to the universal 
validity of our axiom (a), namely that no power of R is to be equivalent 
to the converse of R : for if we have both xyz and yzx , we shall have (so 

far at least as x,y, z are concerned) R 7 = R, i.e. if xRy and yRz , then 



210 


Oixler 


[chap, xxv 

zRx. This last course seems to be the best. Hence in all cases where 
our first instance of between is defined by a one-one relation if, we shall 
substitute the relation R\ which means “some positive power of R” 
The relation R ' is then transitive, and the condition that no positive 
power of R is to be equivalent to R is equivalent to the condition that 
R ' is to be asymmetrical. Hence, finally, the whole matter is simplified 
into the following : 

To say that y is between x and z is equivalent to saying that there 
is some transitive asymmetrical relation which relates both x and y> and 
y and z. 

This short and simple statement, as the above lengthy argument 
shows, contains neither more nor less than our original definition, to- 
gether with the emendations which we gradually found to be necessary. 
The question remains, however : Is this the meaning of between ? 

198. A negative instance can be at once established if we allow the 
phrase : R is a relation between x and y. The phrase, as the reader will 
have observed, has been with difficulty excluded from the definitions of 
betxveen , which its introduction would have rendered at least verbally 
circular. The phrase may have none but a linguistic importance, or 
again it may point to a real insufficiency in the above definition. Let 
us examine the relation of a relation R to its terms x and y. In the 
first place, there certainly is such a relation. To be a term which has 
the relation R to some other term is certainly to have a relation to J?, 
a relation which we may express as “ belonging to the domain of R” 
Thus if xRy , x will belong to the domain of R , and y to that of R. 
If we express this relation between x and R , or between y and R , by £, 
we shall have xER, yER. If further we express the relation of R to R 
by /, we shall have RIR and RIR. Thus we have xER y yEIR. Now 
El is by no means the converse of E , and thus the above definition of 
between , if for this reason only, does not apply ; also neither E nor El 
is transitive. Thus our definition of betxveen is wholly inapplicable to 
such a case. Now it may well be doubted whether between , in this case, 
has at all the same meaning as in other cases. Certainly we do not in 
this way obtain series : x and y are not, in the same sense as /f, between 
R and other terms. Moreover, if we admit relations of a term to itself, 
we shall have to admit that such relations are between a term and 
itself, which we agreed to be impossible. Hence we may be tempted 
to regard the use of betxveen in this case as due to the linguistic accident 
that the relation is usually mentioned between the subject and the 
object, as in “ A is the father of B On the other hand, it may be 
urged that a relation does have a very peculiar relation to the pair of 
terms which it relates, and that between should denote a relation of one 
term to two others. To the objection concerning relations of a term 
to itself, it may l>e answered that such relations, in any system, con- 



197 - 199 ] The meaning of Order 211 

stitute a grave logical difficulty ; that they would, if possible, be denied 

philosophic validity ; and that even where the relation asserted is 
identity, there must be two identical terms, which are therefore not 
quite identical. As this raises a fundamental difficulty, which we cannot 
discuss here, it will be prudent to allow the answer to pass*. And it 
may be further urged that use of the same word in two connections 
points always to some analogy, the extent of which should be carefully 
indicated by those who deny that the meaning is the same in both 
cases ; and that the analogy here is certainly profounder than the mere 
order of words in a sentence, which is, in any case, far more variable 

in this respect than the phrase that a relation is between its terms. 

To these remarks, however, it may . be retorted that the objector has 
himself indicated the precise extent of the analogy : the relation of a 
relation to its terms is a relation of one term to two others, just as 
between is, and this is what makes the two cases similar. This last 
retort is, I think, valid, and we may allow that the relation of a relation 
to its terms, though involving a most important logical problem, is 
not the same as the relation of between by which order is to be con- 
stituted. 

Nevertheless, the above definition of between , though we shall be 
ultimately forced to accept it, seems, at first sight, scarcely adequate 
from a philosophical point of view. The reference to some asymmetrical 
relation is vague, and seems to require to be replaced by some phrase 
in which no such undefined relation appears, but only the terms and 
the betweenness. This brings us to the second of the above opinions 
concerning between. 

199. (2) Between, it may be said, is not a relation of three terms 

at all, but a relation of two relations, namely difference of sense. Now 
if we take this view, the first point to be observed is, that we require 
the two opposite relations, not merely in general, but as particularized 
by belonging to one and the same term. This distinction is already 
familiar from the case of magnitudes and quantities. Before and aftei 
in the abstract do not constitute between : it is only when one and the 
same term is both before and after that between arises : this term is 
then between what it is before and what it is after. Hence there is 
a difficulty in the reduction of between to difference of sense. The par- 
ticularized relation is a logically puzzling entity, which in Part I (§ 55) 
we found it necessary to deny ; and it is not quite easy to distinguish 
a relation of two relations, particularized as belonging to the same term, 
from a relation of the term in question to two others. At the same 
time, great advantages are secured by this reduction. We get rid of 
the necessity for a triangular relation, to which many philosophers may 
object, and we assign a common element to all cases of between , namely 
difference of sense, i.e. the difference between an asymmetrical relation 
and its converse. 


* Cf. § 9o. 



212 


Order 


[chap, xxv 

200. The question whether there can be an ultimate triangular 
relation is one whose actual solution is both difficult and unimportant, 
but whose precise statement is of very great importance. Philosophers 
seem usually to assume — though not, so far as I know, explicitly — that 
relations never have more than two terms ; and even such relations they 
reduce, by force or guile, to predications. Mathematicians, on the other 
hand, almost invariably speak of relations of many terms. We cannot, 
however, settle the question by a simple appeal to mathematical instances, 
for it remains a question whether these are, or are not, susceptible of 
analysis. Suppose, for example, that the projective plane has been 
defined as a relation of three points : the philosopher may always say 
that it should have been defined as a relation of a point and a line, 
or of two intersecting lines — a change which makes little or no mathe- 
matical difference. Let us see what is the precise meaning of the question. 
There are among terms two radically different kinds, whose difference 
constitutes the truth underlying the doctrine of substance and attribute. 
There are terms which can never occur except as terms ; such are points, 
instants, colours, sounds, bits of matter, and generally terms of the kind 
of which existents consist. There are, on the other hand, terms which 
can occur otherwise than as terms ; such are being, adjectives generally, 
and relations. Such terms we agreed to call concepts*. It is the presence 
of concepts not occurring as terms which distinguishes propositions from 
mere concepts ; in every proposition there is at least one more concept 
than there are terms. The traditional view — which may be called the 
subject- predicate theory — holds that in every proposition there is one 
term, the subject, and one concept which is not a term, the predicate. 
This view, for many reasons, must be abandoned f- The smallest 
departure from the traditional opinion lies in holding that, where 
propositions are not reducible to the subject-predicate form, there are 
always two terms only, and one concept which is not a term. (The 
two terms may, of course, be complex, and may each contain concepts 
which are not terms.) This gives the opinion that relations are always 
between only two terms ; for a relation may be defined as any concept 
which occurs in a proposition containing more than one term. But 
there seems no d priori reason for limiting relations to two terms, 
and there are instances which lead to an opposite view. In the first 
place, when the concept of a number is asserted of a collection, if the 
collection has n terms, there are n terms, and only one concept (namely 
n) which is not a term. In the second place, such relations as those 
of an existent to the place and time of its existence are only reducible 
by a very cumbrous method to relations of two terms J. If, however, 
the reduction be held essential, it seems to be always formally possible, 

* See Part I, Chap. iv. 

t See The Philosophy of Leibniz, by the present author, Cambridge, 1900; 
Chapter ii, § 10. 

X See Part VII, Chap. uv. 



213 


200 - 202 ] The meaning of Order 

by compounding part of the proposition into one complex term, and 
then asserting a relation between this part and the remainder, which 
can be similarly reduced to one term. There may be cases w'here this 
is not possible, but I do not know of them. The question whether such 
a formal reduction is to be always undertaken is not, however, so far 
as 1 have been able to discover, one of any great practical or theoretical 
importance. 

201. There is thus no valid a priori reason in favour of analyzing 
between into a relation of two relations, if a triangular relation seems 
otherwise preferable. The other reason in favour of the analysis of 
between is more considerable. So long as between is a triangular relation 
of the terms, it must be taken either as indefinable, or as involving a 
reference to some transitive asymmetrical relation. But if we make 
between consist essentially in the opposition of two relations belonging 
to one term, there seems to be no longer any undue indeterminateness. 
Against this view we may urge, however, that no reason now appears 
why the relations in question should have to be transitive, and that — 
what is more important — the very meaning of between involves the" 
terms, for it is they, and not their relations, that have order. And 
if it were only the relations that were relevant, it would not be necessary, 
as in fact it is, to particularize them by the mention of the terms 
between which they hold. Thus on the whole, the opinion that between 
is not a triangular relation must be abandoned. 

202. (3) We come now to the view that between is an ultimate 
and indefinable relation. In favour of this view it might be urged that, 
in all our ways of generating open series, we could see that cases of 
between did arise, and that we could apply a test to suggested definitions. 
This seems to show that the suggested definitions were merely conditions 
which imply relations of between , and were not true definitions of this 
relation. The question : Do such and such conditions insure that y 
shall be between x and z ? is always one which we can answer, without 
having to appeal (at least consciously) to any previous definition. And 
the unanalyzable nature of between may be supported by the fact that 
the relation is symmetrical with respect to the two extremes, which was 
not the case w'ith the relations of pail's from which between was inferred. 
There is, however, a very grave difficulty in the way of such a view', and 
that is, that sets of terms have many different orders, so that in one we 
may have y between x and z , while in another we have x between 
y and z*. This seems to show that between essentially involves reference 
to the relations from which it is inferred. If not, we shall at least have 
to admit that these relations are relevant to the genesis of series ; for 
series require imperatively that there should be at most one relevant 

* This case is illustrated by the rational numbers, w'hicli may be taken in order 
of magnitude, or in one of the orders ( e.g . the logical order) m which they are 
denumerable. The logical order is the order 1, 2, 1/2, 3, 1/3, 2/3, 4, 



214 


Order 


[chap, xxv 


relation of between among three terms. Hence we must, apparently, 
allow that between is not the sole source of series, but must always be 
supplemented by the mention of some transitive asymmetrical relation 
with respect to which the betweenness arises. The most that can be 
said is, that this transitive asymmetrical relation of two terms may 
itself be logically subsequent to, and derived from, some relation of 
three terms, such as those considered in Chapter xxiv, in the fourth way 
of generating series. When such relations fulfil the axioms which were 
then mentioned, they lead of themselves to relations between pairs of 
terms. For we may say that b precedes c when aid implies bed, and 
that b follows c when abd implies cbd 9 where a and d are fixed terms. 
Though such relations are merely derivative, it is in virtue of them 
that between occurs in such cases. Hence we seem finally compelled to 
leave the reference to an asymmetrical relation in our definition. We 
shall therefore say : 

A term y is between two terms ,r and z with reference to a transitive 
asymmetrical relation R when xRy and yRz. In no other case can y 
be said properly to be between x and z ; and this definition gives not 
merely a criterion, but the very meaning of betweenness. 

203. We have next to consider the meaning of separation of 
couples. This is a more complicated relation than between , and was 
but little considered until elliptic Geometry brought it into prominence. 
It has been shown by Vailati* that this relation, like between , always 
involves a transitive asymmetrical relation of two terms ; but this rela- 
tion of a pair of terms is itself relative to three other fixed terms of the 
set, as, in the case of between , it was relative to two fixed terms. It is 


further sufficiently evident that wherever there is a transitive asymme- 
trical relation, which relates every pair of terms in a collection of not 
less than four terms, there there are pairs of couples having the relation 
of separation. Thus we shall find it possible to express separation, as 
well as between , by means of transitive asymmetrical relations and their 
terms. But let us first examine directly the meaning of separation. 

We may denote the fact that a and c are separated by b and d by 
the symbol abed. If, then, a, b , c, d, e be any five terms of the set we 
require the following properties to hold of the relation of separation (of 


which, it will be observed, only the last involves five 
terms) : 

1. abed = bade. 

2. abed = adeb. 

3. abed excludes aebd. 

4. We must have abed or aedb or ad be. 

5. abed and aide together imply abde’f. 



* Ititista di Matemntim, v, pp. 75 — 78. See also Fieri, I Principii delta Geometria 
di Potixioue, Turin, 1898, § 7. 

t These five properties are taken from Vailati, foe. cit . and ib. p. 183. 



215 


202 - 204 ] The meaning of Order 

These properties may be illustrated by the consideration of five 
points on a circle, as in the accompanying figure. Whatever relation 
of two pairs of terms possesses these properties we shall call a relation 
of separation between the pairs. It will be seen that the relation is 
symmetrical, but not in general transitive. 

204 . Wherever we have a transitive asymmetrical relation R be- 
tween any two terms of a set of not less than four terms, the relation of 
separation necessarily arises. For in any series, if four terms have the 
order abed, then a and c are separated by b and d ; and every transitive 
asymmetrical relation, as we have seen, provided there are at least two 
consecutive instances of it, gives rise to a series. Thus in this case, 
separation is a mere extension of between : if R be asymmetrical and 
transitive, and aRb, bRc, cRd , then a and c are separated by b and d. 
The existence of such a relation is therefore a sufficient condition of 
separation. 

It is also a necessary condition. For, suppose a relation of separation 
to exist, and let a, b , r, d, e be five terms of the set to which the relation 
applies. Then, considering a, b , c as fixed, and d and e as variable, 
twelve cases may arise. In virtue of the five fundamental properties, we 
may introduce the symbol abede to denote that, striking out any one 
of these five letters, the remaining four have the relation of separation 
which is indicated by the resulting symbol. Thus by the fifth property, 
abed and aide imply abode *. Thus the twelve cases arise from permuting 
d and c, while keeping «, b , c fixed. (It should be observed that it 
makes no difference whether a letter appears at the end or the beginning: 
i.e. abode is the same case as eabod . We may therefore decide not to put 
either d or e before a.) Of these twelve cases, six will have d before e y 
and six will have e before d. In the first six cases, we say that, with 
respect to the sense abo , d precedes e ; in the other six cases, we say that 
e precedes d. In order to deal with limiting cases, we shall say further 
that a precedes every other term, and that b precedes cf. We shall then 
find that the relation of preceding is asymmetrical and transitive, and 
that every pair of terms of our set is such that one precedes and the 
other follows. In this way our relation of separation is reduced, formally 
at least, to the combination of u a precedes b” “ b precedes c* and u c 
precedes d” 

The above reduction is for many reasons highly interesting. In the 
first place, it shows the distinction between open and closed series to be 
somewhat superficial. For although our series may initially be of the 
sort which is called closed, it becomes, by the introduction of the above 
transitive relation, an open series, having a for its beginning, but having 


* The argument is somewhat tedious, and 1 therefore omit it. It will he found 
in Vailati, loc. cit. 

t Fieri, op. cit. p. 32. 



216 


Order 


[chap, xxv 

possibly no last term, and not in any sense returning to a. Again it is 
of the highest importance in Geometry, since it shows how order may 
arise on the elliptic straight line, by purely projective considerations, 
in a manner which is far more satisfactory than that obtained from 
von Staudt’s construction*. And finally, it is of great importance as 
unifying the two sources of order, between and separation; since it 
shows that transitive asymmetrical relations are always present where 
either occurs, and that either implies the other. For, by the relation of 
preceding, we can say that one term is between two others, although we 
started solely from separation of pairs. 

205. At the same time, the above reduction (and also, it would 
seem, the corresponding reduction in the case of betioeen) cannot be 
allowed to be more than formal. That is, the three terms a, 6, c by 
relation to which our transitive asymmetrical relation was defined, are 
essential to the definition, and cannot be omitted. The reduction shows 
no reason for supposing that there is any transitive asymmetrical relation 
independent of all other terms than those related, though it is arbitrary 
what other terms we choose. And the fact that the term a, which is 
not essentially peculiar, appeal's as the beginning of the series, illustrates 
this fact. Where there are transitive asymmetrical relations independent 
of all outside reference, our series cannot have an arbitrary beginning, 
though it may have none at all. Thus the four-term relation of sepa- 
ration remains logically prior to the resulting two-term relation, and 
cannot be analyzed into the latter. 

206. But when we have said that the reduction is formal, w'e have 
not said that it is irrelevant to the genesis of order. On the contrary, 
it is just because such a reduction is possible that the four- term relation 
leads to order. The resulting asymmetrical transitive relation is in 
reality a relation of five terms ; but when three of these are kept fixed, 
it becomes asymmetrical and transitive as regards the other two. Thus 
although between applies to such series, and although the essence of 
order consists, here as elsewhere, in the fact that one term has, to two 
others, converse relations which are asymmetrical and transitive, yet 
such an order can only arise in a collection containing at least five terms, 
because five terms are needed for the characteristic relation. And it 
should be observed that all series, when thus explained, are open series, 
in the sense that there is some relation betw een pairs of terms, no power 
of which is equal to its converse, or to identity. 

207. Thus finally, to sum up this long and complicated discussion : 
The six methods of generating series enumerated in Chapter xxiv are all 
genuinely distinct ; but the second is the only one which is fundamental, 

* The advantages of this method are evident from Pieri’s work quoted above, 
where many things which seemed incapable of projective proof are rigidly deduced 
from projective premisses. See Part VI, Chap. xi.v. 



217 


204-207] The meaning of Order 

And the other five agree in this, that they are all reducible to the second. 
Moreover, it is solely in virtue of their reducibility to the second that 
they give rise to order. The minimum ordinal proposition, which can 
Always be made wherever there is an order at all, is of the form : is 

between ,?• and z " ; and this proposition means; “There is some 
asymmetrical transitive relation which holds between and y and 
between y and z? This \ery simple conclusion might have been guessed 
from the beginning; but it was only by discussing all the apparently 
exceptional cases that the conclusion could be solidly established. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 


ASYMMETRICAL RELATIONS. 

208. We have now seen that all order depends upon transitive 
asymmetrical relations. As such relations are of a kind which traditional 
logic is unwilling to admit, and as the refusal to admit them is one of 
the main sources of the contradictions which the Critical Philosophy has 
found in mathematics, it will be desirable, before proceeding further, to 
make an excursion into pure logic, and to set forth the grounds which 
make the admission of such relations necessary. At a later stage (in 
Part VI, Chap, u), I shall endeavour to answer the general objections 
of philosophers to relations ; for the present, I am concerned only with 
asymmetrical relations. 

Relations may be divided into four classes, according as they do 
or do not possess either of two attributes, transitiveness* and symmetry. 
Relations such that xRy always implies yRx are called .symmetrical ; 
relations such that xRy, yRz together always imply xRz are called 
transitive. Relations which do not possess the first property I shall 
call not . symmetrical ; relations which do possess the opposite property, 
i.e. for which xRy always excludes yRx, I shall call a, symmetrical. 
Relations which do not possess the second property I shall call not 
transitive ; those which possess the property that xRy, yRz always 
exclude xRz I shall call intransitive. All these cases may be illus- 
trated from human relationships. The relation brother or sister is 
symmetrical, and is transitive if we allow that a man may be his 
own brother, and a woman her own sister. The relation brother is not 
symmetrical, but is transitive. Half-brother or half-sister is symmetrical 
but not transitive. Spouse is symmetrical but intransitive; descendant 
is asymmetrical but transitive. Htdf -brother is not symmetrical and not 
transitive ; if third marriages were forbidden, it would be intransitive. 
Son-in-lmc is asymmetrical and not transitive ; if second marriages were 
forbidden, it would be intransitive. Bmther-in-laio is not symmetrical 

* This term appears to have been first used in the present sense by De Morgan ; 
see Cumb. Phi/. Trans, ix, p. 104 ; x, p. 340. The term is now in general use. 



219 


208-210] Asymmetrical Relations 

and not transitive. Finally, father is both asymmetrical and intransitive. 
Of not-transitive but not intransitive relations there is, so far as I know, 
only one important instance, namely diversity ; of not-sym metrical but not 
asymmetrical relations there seems to be similarly only one important 
instance, namely implication . In other cases, of the kind that usually 
occur, relations are either transitive or intransitive, and either sym- 
metrical or asymmetrical. 

209. Relations which are both symmetrical and transitive are formally 
of the nature of equality. Any term of the field of such a relation has the 
relation in question to itself, though it may not have the relation to any 
other term. For denoting the relation by the sign of equality, if a be 
of the field of the relation, there is. some term b such that a — b . If 
a and b be identical, then a « a. But if not, then, since the relation 
is symmetrical, b — a\ since it is transitive, and we have a = b y 6 = a, 
it follows that a = a. The property of a relation which insures that 
it holds between a term and itself is called by Peano reflexiveness , and 
he has shown, contrary to what was previously believed, that this 
property cannot be inferred from symmetry and transitiveness. For 
neither of these properties asserts that there is a b such that a — b, but 
only what follows in case there is such a b ; and if there is no such b 9 
then the proof of a = a fails*. This property of reflexiveness, however, 
introduces some difficulty. There is only one relation of which it is true 
without limitation, and that is identity. In all other cases, it holds 
only of the terms of a certain class. Quantitative equality, for example, 
is only reflexive as applied to quantities ; of other terms, it is absurd 
to assert that they have quantitative equality with themselves. Logical 
equality, again, is only reflexive for classes, or propositions, or relations. 
Simultaneity is only reflexive for events, and so on. Thus, with any 
given symmetrical transitive relation, other than identity, we can only 
assert reflexiveness within a certain class ; and of this class, apart from 
the principle of abstraction (already mentioned in Part III, Chap, xix, 
and shortly to be discussed at length), there need be no definition 
except as the extension of the transitive symmetrical relation in question. 
And when the class is so defined, reflexiveness within that class, as we 
have seen, follows from transitiveness and symmetry. 

210. By introducing what I have called the principle of abstraction f, 
a somewhat better account of reflexiveness becomes possible. Peano has 
defined^ a process which he calls definition by abstraction, of which, os 
he shows, frequent use is made in Mathematics. This process is as 

* See e.g. Revue de Mathematiques, T. vii, p. 22 ; Notations de Logique Matht- 
matxque , Turin, 1894, p. 4.5, F. 1901, p. 198. 

t An axiom virtually identical with this principle, but not stated with the 
necessary precision, and not demonstrated, will be found in De Morgan, Camb. Phil . 
Trans . Vol. x, p. 34*5, 

J Notations de Logique Mathematique, p. 45. 



220 


Orde r 


[chap, xxvi 

follows : when there is any relation which is transitive, symmetrical and 
(within its field) reflexive, then, if this relation holds between u and r, 
we define a new entity <f> (w), which is to be identical with <f> ( v ). Thus 
our relation is analyzed into sameness of relation to the new term 
<f> ( u ) or <f> ( v ). Now the legitimacy of this process, as set forth by 
Peano, requires an axiom, namely the axiom that, if there is any 
instance of the relation in question, then there is such an entity as 
<f> (u) or <f) (v). This axiom is my principle of abstraction, which, 
precisely stated, is as follows : “ Every transitive symmetrical relation, 
of which there is at least one instance, is analyzable into joint possession 
of a new relation to a new term, the new relation being such that no 
term can have this relation to more than one term, but that its converse 
does not have this property.” This principle amounts, in common 
language, to the assertion that transitive symmetrical relations arise 
from a common property, with the addition that this property stands, 
to the terms which have it, in a relation in which nothing else stands 
to those terms. It gives the precise statement of the principle, often 
applied by philosophers, that symmetrical transitive relations always 
spring from identity of content. Identity of content is, however, an 
extremely vague phrase, to which the above proposition gives, in the 
present case, a precise signification, but one which in no way answers 
the purpose of the phrase, which is, apparently, the reduction of relations 
to adjectives of the related terms. 

It is now possible to give a clearer account of the reflexive property. 
Let R be our symmetrical relation, and let S be the asymmetrical 
relation which tw r o terms having the relation R must have to some 
third term. Then the proposition xRy is equivalent to this: “There 
is some term a such that xSa and ySa .” Hence it follows that, if x 
belongs to what we have called the domain of S\ i.c. if there is any 
term a such that xSa, then xRx ; for xRx is merely xSa and xSa. It 
does not of course follow that, there is any other term y such that xRy, 
and thus Beano's objections to the usual proof of reflexiveness are valid. 
But by means of the analysis of symmetrical transitive relations, we 
obtain the proof of the reflexive property, together with the exact 
limitation to which it is subject. 

211. We can now' see the reason for excluding from our accounts 
of the methods of generating series a seventh method, which some 
readers may have expected to find. This is the method in which 
position is merely relative — a method which, in Chap, xix, § 154, 
we rejected as regards quantity. As the whole philosophy of space 
and time is bound up with the question as to the legitimacy of this 
method, which is in fact the question as to absolute and relative 
position, it may be well to give an account of it here, and to show 
how the principle of abstraction leads to the absolute theory of position. 

If w r e consider such a series as that of events, and if we refuse to 



210 - 212 ] Asymmetrical Relations 221 

allow absolute time, we shall have to admit three fundamental relations 
among events, namely, simultaneity, priority, and posteriority. Such a 
theory may be formally stated as follows : Let there be a class of terms, 
such that any two, *r and y, have either an asymmetrical transitive 
relation P, or the converse relation P, or a symmetrical transitive 
relation R. Also let jrSy 9 yPz imply xPz y and let xPy y yRz imply xPz, 
Then all the terms can be arranged in a series, in which, however, there 
may be many terms which have the same place in the series. This 
place, according to the relational theory of position, is nothing but 
the transitive symmetrical relation R to a number of other terms. But 
it follows from ihe principle of abstraction that there is some relation 
such that, if *rP/y, there is some one entity t for which xSt,ySt. We 
shall then find that the different entities t , corresponding to different 
groups of our original terms, also form a series, but one in which 
any two different terms have an asymmetrical relation (formally, the 
product SRS). These terms t will then be the absolute positions of 
our and y\ and our supposed seventh method of generating series 
is reduced to the fundamental second method. Thus there will be no 
series having only relative position, but in all series it is the positions 
themselves that constitute the series*. 

212. ( We are now in a position to meet the philosophic dislike of \ 
relations. The whole account of order given above, and the present 
argument concerning abstraction, will be necessarily objected to by 
those philosophers — and they are, I fear, the major part — who hold 
that no relations can possess absolute and metaphysical validity. It 
is not my intention here to enter upon the general question, but merely 
to exhibit the objections to any analysis of asymmetrical relations. 

It is a common opinion — often held unconsciously, and employed 
in argument, even by those who do not explicitly advocate it — that 
all propositions, ultimately, consist of a subject and a predicate. When 
this opinion is confronted by a relational proposition, it has two ways 
of dealing with it, of which the one may be called monadistic, 
the other monistic. Given, say, the proposition aRb , where R is some 
relation, the monadistic view will analyse this into two propositions, 
which we may call ar x and 6r a , which give to a and b respectively 
adjectives -Supposed to be together equi valent to R. The monistic 
view, on the contrary, regards the relation as a property of the whole 
composed of a and b . and as thus equivalent to a proposition which 
we may denote by ( ab)r . Of these views, the first is represented by 
Leibniz and (on the whole) by Lotze, the second by Spinoza and 
Mr Bradley. Let us examine these views successively, as applied to 


* A formal treatment of relative position is given by Schroder, Sur une extension 
d* Vidve d'ordre , Cottgrttt, Vol. m, p. 235. 



222 Order [chap, xxvi 

asymmetrical relations; and for the sake of definiteness, let us take 
the relations of greater and less. 

213. The monadistic view is stated with admirable lucidity by 
Leibniz in the following passage* : 

“The ratio or proportion between two lines L and M may be 
conceived three several ways; as a ratio of the greater L to the 
lesser M\ as a ratio of the lesser M to the greater L ; and lastly, as 
something abstracted from both, that is, as the ratio between L and M, 
without considering which is the antecedent, or which the consequent ; 
which the subject, and which the object.... In the first way of considering 
them, L the greater, in the second M the lesser, is the subject of that 
accident which philosophers call relation. But which of them will be 
the subject, in the third way of considering them ? It cannot be said 
that both of them, L and M together, are the subject of such an 
accident; for if so, we should have an accident in two subjects, with 
one leg in one, and the other in the other ; which is contrary to the 
notion of accidents. Therefore we must say that this -relation, in this 
third way of considering it, is indeed out of the subjects; but being 
neither a substance nor an accident, it must be a mere ideal thing, 
the consideration of which is nevertheless useful. 1 '' 

214. The third of the above ways of considering the relation of 
greater and less is, roughly speaking, that which the monists advocate, 
holding, as they do, that the whole composed of L and M is one subject, 
so that their way of considering ratio does not compel us, as Leibniz 
supposed, to place it among bipeds. For the present our concern is only 
with the first two ways. In the first way of considering the matter, we 
have “I is (greater than M)™ the words in brackets being considered 
as an adjective of L . But when we examine this adjective it is at once 
evident that it is complex: it consists, at least, of the parts greater 
and Jf, and both these parts are essential. To say that L is greater 
does not at all convey our meaning, and it is highly probable that M is 
also greater. The supposed adjective of L involves some reference to 
but what can be meant by a reference the theory leaves unintelligible. 
An adjective involving a reference to M is plainly an adjective which is 
relative to M , and this is merely a cumbrous way of describing a relation. 
Or, to put the matter otherwise, if L has an adjective corresponding 
to the fact that it is greater than M, this adjective is logically sub- 
sequent to, and is merely derived from, the direct relation of L to M. 
Apart from M> nothing appears in the analysis of L to differentiate it 
from M ; and yet, on the theory of relations in question, L should differ 
intrinsically from M. Thus we should be forced, in all cases of asym- 
metrical relations, to admit a specific difference between the related 
terms, although no analysis of either singly will reveal any relevant 


* Phil. Werke, Gerhard t’a ed., Vol. vii, p. 401 . 



212-214] Asymmetrical Relations 223 

property which it possesses and the other lacks. For the monadistic 
theory of relations, this constitutes a contradiction ; and it is a contra- 
diction which condemns the theory from which it springs*. 

Let us examine further the application of the monadistic theory to 
quantitative relations. The proposition “ A is greater than B " is to be 
analyzable into two propositions, one giving an adjective to A, the 
other giving one to B. The advocate of the opinion in question will 
probably hold that A and B are quantities, not magnitudes, and will 
say that the adjectives required are the magnitudes of A and B . But 
then he will have to admit a relation between the magnitudes, which 
will be as asymmetrical as the relation which the magnitudes were to 
explain. Hence the magnitudes will need new adjectives, and so on 
ad infinitum ; and the infinite process will have to be completed before 
any meaning can be assigned to our original proposition. This kind 
of infinite process is undoubtedly objectionable, since its sole object 
is to explain the meaning of a certain proposition, and yet none of its 
steps bring it any nearer to that meaning f. Thus we cannot take 
the magnitudes of A and B as the required adjectives. But further, 
if we take any adjectives whatever except such as have each a reference 
to the other term, we shall not be able, even formally, to give any 
account of the relation, without assuming just such a relation between 
the adjectives. For the mere fact that the adjectives are different will 
yield only a symmetrical relation. Thus if our two terms have different 
colours we find that A has to B the relation of differing in colour, 
a relation which no amount of careful handling will render asymmetrical. 
Or if we were to recur to magnitudes, we could merely say that A and 
B differ in magnitude, which gives us no indication as to which is 
the greater. Thus the adjectives of A and B must be, as in Leibniz’s 
analysis, adjectives having a reference each to the other term. The 
adjective of A must be w greater than B" and that of B must be u less 
than A? Thus A and B differ, since they have different adjectives — 
B is not greater than B y and A is not less than A — but the adjectives 
are extrinsic, in the sense that A's adjective has reference to B , and 
2Ts to A . Hence the attempted analysis of the relation fails, and we 


* See a paper on The Relations of Number and Quantity,” Mind, N.S. No. 23. ) 
111 is paper was written while I still adhered to(tlie monadistic theory of relations 
the contradiction in question, therefore, was regarded as inevitable. The following 
passage from Kant raises the same point : “ Die rechte Hand ist der linken ahnlich 
und gleich, und wenn man bios auf eine derselben allein sieht, auf die Proportion 
der Lage der Theile unter einander und auf die Grosse des Ganzen, so muss eine 
vollst&ndige Beschreibung der einen in alien Stiicken auch von der andern gelten.” 

( Van deni ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume , ed. Hart. , Vol. u, 
p. 380.) 

t Where an infinite process of this kind is required we are necessarily dealing 
with a proposition w'hicli is an infinite unity, in the sense of Part II, Chap. xvn. 



224 


Order 


[chap, xxvi 

are forced to admit what the theory was designed to avoid, a so-called 
w external ” relation, i.e . one implying no complexity in either of the 
related terms. 

The same result may be proved of asymmetrical relations generally, 
since it depends solely upon the fact that both identity and diversity 
are symmetrical. Let a and b have an asymmetrical relation R, so 
that aRb and bRa. Let the supposed adjectives (which, as we have 
seen, must each have a reference to the other term) be denoted by ft 
and a respectively. Thus our terms become aft and ba. a involves 
a reference to a, and ft to 6 ; and a and ft differ, since the relation 
is asymmetrical. But a and b have no intrinsic differences corresponding 
to the relation R , and prior to it ; or, if they have, the points of 
difference must themselves have a relation analogous to R, so that 
nothing is gained. Either a or ft expresses a difference lx?tween a 
and 6, but one which, since either a or ft involves reference to a term 
other than that whose adjective it is, so far from being prior to R, 
is in fact the relation R itself. And since a and ft both presuppose R, 
the difference between a and ft cannot be used to supply an intrinsic 
difference between a and b. Thus we have again a difference without 
a prior point of difference. This shows that some asymmetrical rela- 
tions must be ultimate, and that at least one such ultimate asymmetrical 
relation must be a component in any asymmetrical relation that may be 
suggested. 

It is easy to criticize the monad istic theory from a general stand- 
point, by developing the contradictions which spring from the relations 
of the terms to the adjectives into which our first relation has been 
analyzed. These considerations, which have no special connection with 
asymmetry, belong to general philosophy, and have been urged by 
advocates of the monistic theory. Thus Mr Bradley says of the mona- 
distic theory*: “We, in brief, are led by a principle of fission which 
conducts us to no end. Every quality in relation has, in consequence, 
a diversity within its own nature, and this diversity cannot immediately 
be asserted of the quality. Hence the quality must exchange its unity 
for an internal relation. But, thus set free, the diverse aspects, because 
each something in relation, must each be something also beyond. This 
diversity is fatal to the internal unity of each ; and it demands a new 
relation, and so on without limit.*" It remains to be seen whether the 
monistic theory, in avoiding this difficulty, does not become subject to 
others quite as serious. 

215. The monistic theory holds that every relational proposition 
aRb is to be resolved into a proposition concerning the whole which 
a and b compose — a proposition which we may denote by ( ab)r . This 
view, like the other, may be examined with special reference to asym- 


Appearance and Reality, 1st edition, p. 31. 



214 , 215 ] Asymmetrical Relations 225 

metrical relations, or from the standpoint of general philosophy. We 
arc told, by those who advocate this opinion, that the whole contains 
diversity within itself, that it synthesizes differences, and that it performs 
other similar feats. For my part, I am unable to attach any precise 
significance to these phrases. But let us do our best. 

The proposition 44 a is greater than A," we are told, does not really 
say anything about either a or A, but about the two together. Denoting 
the whole which they compose by (aft), it says, we will suppose, u (aA) 
contains diversity of magnitude.'" Now to this statement — neglecting 
for the present all general arguments — there is a special objection in 
the case of asymmetry, (aft) is symmetrical with regard to a and A, 
and thus the property of the whole will be exactly the same in the case 
where a is greater than ft as in the case where ft is greater than a. 
Leibniz, who did not accept the monistic theory, and had therefore 
no reason to render it plausible, clearly perceived this fact, as appears 
from the above quotation. For, in his third way of regarding ratio, 
we do not consider which is the antecedent, which the consequent; 
and it is indeed sufficiently evident that, in the whole (aft) as such, 
there is neither antecedent nor consequent. In order to distinguish 
a whole (aft) from a whole (fta), as we must do if we are to explain 
asymmetry, we shall be forced back from the whole to the parts and 
their relation. For (aft) and (fta) consist of precisely the same parts, 
and differ in no respect whatever save the sense of the relation between 
a and ft. 44 a is greater than ft and 44 ft is greater than a v * are proposi- 
tions containing precisely the same constituents, and giving rise therefore 
to precisely the same whole ; their difference lies solely in the fact that 
greater is, in the first case, a relation of a to ft, in the second, a relation 
of ft to a. Thus the distinction of sense, i.e. the distinction between an 
asymmetrical relation and its converse, is one which the monistic theory 
of relations is wholly unable to explain. 

Arguments of a more general nature might be multiplied almost 
indefinitely, but the following argument seems peculiarly relevant. The 
relation of whole and part is itself an asymmetrical relation, and the 
whole — as monists are peculiarly fond of telling us — is distinct from all 
its parts, both severally and collectively. Hence when we say “a is 
part of A, v> we really mean, if the monistic theory be correct, to assert 
something of the whole composed of a and ft, which is not to be 
confounded with 6. If the proposition concerning this new whole be not 
one of whole and part there will be no true judgments of whole and 
part, and it will therefore be false to say that a relation between the 
parts is really an adjective of the whole. If the new proposition is one 
of whole and part, if will require a new one for its meaning, and so on. 
If, as a desperate measure, the monist asserts that the whole composed 
of a and A is not distinct from A, he is compelled to admit that a whole 
is the sum (in the sense of Symbolic Logic) of its parts, which, besides 



226 


Order 


[chap, xxn 

being an abandonment of bis whole position, renders it inevitable that 
the whole should be symmetrical as regards its parts — a view which we 
have already seen to be fatal. And hence we find monists driven to 
the view that the only true whole, the Absolute, has no parts at all, 
and that no propositions in regard to it or anything else are quite 
true — a view which, in the mere statement, unavoidably contradicts 
itself. And surely an opinion which holds all propositions to be in the 
end self-contradictory is sufficiently condemned by the fact that, if it 
be accepted, it also must be self-contradictory. 

216. We have now seen^that asymmetrical relations are unin- 
telligible on both the usual theories of relation*. Hence, since such 
relations are involved in Number, Quantity, Order, Space, Time, and 
Motion, we can hardly hope for a satisfactory philosophy of Mathematics 
so long as we adhere to the view that no relation can be “purely 
external.'" As soon, however, as we adopt a different theory, the logical 
puzzles, which have hitherto obstructed philosophers, are seen to be 
artificial. Among the terms commonly regarded as relational, those 
that are symmetrical and transitive — such as equality and simultaneity — 
are capable of reduction to what has beeri vaguely called identity of 
content, but this in turn must be analyzed into sameness of relation 
to some other term. For the so-called properties of a term are, in fact, 
only other terms to which it stands in some relation ; and a common 
property of two terms is a term to which both stand in the same 
relation. 

The present long digression into the realm of logic is necessitated 
by the fundamental importance of order, and by the total impossibility 
of explaining order without abandoning the most cherished and wide- 
spread of philosophic dogmas. Everything depends, where order is 
concerned, upon asymmetry and difference of sense, but these two concepts 
are unintelligible to the traditional logic. In the next chapter we shall 
have to examine the connection of difference of sense with what appears 
in Mathematics as difference of sign. In this examination, though some 
pure logic will still be requisite, we shall approach again to mathematical 
topics; and these will occupy us wholly throughout the succeeding chapters 
of this Part.^ 

y * The grounds of these theories will be examined from a more general point of 
view in Part VI, Chap. lu_ 



CHAPTER XXVII. 


DIFFERENCE OF SENSE AND DIFFERENCE OF SIGN. 

217. We have now seen that order depends upon asymmetrical 
relations, and that these always have two senses, as before and after, 
greater and less, east and west, etc. The difference of sense is closely 
connected (though not identical) with the mathematical difference of 
sign. It is a notion of fundamental importance in Mathematics, and 
is, so far as I can see, not explicable in terms of any other notions. 
The first philosopher who realized its importance would seem to be Kant. 
In the Versuch den Begnff der negativen Grime in die Weltweisheit 
einzufuhren (1763), we find him aware of the difference between logical 
opposition and the opposition of positive and negative. In the discussion 
Von dm. ersten Grunde des Unterschiedes der Gegenden im Raume (1768), 
we find a full realization of the importance of asymmetry in spatial 
relations, and a proof, based on this fact, that space cannot be wholly 
relational*. But it seems doubtful whether he realized the connection of 
this asymmetry with difference of ?ign. In 1763 he certainly was not 
aware of the connection, since he regarded pain as a negative amount of 
pleasure, and supposed that a great pleasure and a small pain can be 
added to give a less pleasuref — a view which seems both logically and 
psychologically false. In the Prolegomena (§ 13), as is well known, 
he made the asymmetry of spatial relations a ground for regarding space 
as a mere form of intuition, perceiving, as appears from the discussion 
of 1768, that space could not consist, as Leibniz supposed, of mere 
relations among objects, and being unable, owing to his adherence to 
the logical objection to relations discussed in the preceding chapter, 
to free from contradiction the notion of absolute space with asym- 
metrical relations between its points. Although I cannot regard this 
later and more distinctively Kantian theory as an advance upon that 
of 1768, yet credit is undoubtedly due to Kant for having first called 
attention to the logical importance of asymmetrical relations. 

* See especially ed. Hart, Vol. II, pp. 386, 391. 

t Ed. Hart, Vol. II, p. 83. 



228 


Order 


[chap, xxvn 

218. By difference of sense I mean, in the present discussion at least, 
the difference between an asymmetrical relation and its converse. It is a 
fundamental logical fact that, given any relation /?, and any two terms 
a, ft, there are two propositions to be formed of these elements, the one 
relating a to ft (which I call aRb), the other (bRa) relating b to a. These 
two propositions are always different, though sometimes (as in the case 
of diversity) either implies the other. In other cases, such as logical im- 
plication, the one does not imply either the other or its negation; while 
in a third set of cases, the one implies the negation of the other. It is 
only in cases of the third kind that I shall speak of difference of sense. 
In these cases, aRb excludes bRa. But here another fundamental logical 
fact becomes relevant. In all cases where aRb does not imply bRa there 
is another relation, related to R, which must hold between ft and a. That 
is, there is a relation R such that aRb implies bRa ; and further, bRa 
implies aRb. The relation of R to R is difference of sense. This 
relation is one-one, symmetrical, and intransitive. Its existence is the 
source of series, of the distinction of signs, and indeed of the greater 
part of mathematics. 

219. A question of considerable importance to logic, and especially 
to the theory of inference, may be raised w ith regard to difference of sense. 
Are aRb and bRa really different propositions, or do they only differ 
linguistically P It may be held that there is only one relation R , and 
that all necessary distinctions can be obtained from that between aRb 
and bRa. It may be said that, owing to the exigencies of speech and 
writing, we are compelled to mention either a or b first, and that this gives 
a seeming difference between “ a is greater than b " and “ b is less than 
a"; but that, in reality, these two propositions are identical. But if 
we take this view we shall find it hard to explain the indubitable 
distinction between greater and less. These two words have certainly 
each a meaning, even when no terms are mentioned as related by them. 
And they certainly have different meanings, and are certainly relations. 
Hence if we are to hold that “ a is greater than b ” and u b is less than a " 
are the same proposition, we shall have to maintain that both greater 
and less enter into each of these propositions, which seems obviously 
false ; or else w T e shall have to hold that what really occurs is neither 
of the two, but that third abstract relation mentioned by Leibniz in the 
passage quoted above. In this case the difference between greater and 
less would be one essentially involving a reference to the terms a and ft. 
But this view cannot be maintained without circularity ; for neither the 
greater nor the less is inherently the antecedent, and we can only say 
that, when the greater is the antecedent, the relation is greater ; when 
the less, the relation is less . Hence, it would seem, we must admit that 
R and R are distinct relations. We cannot escape this conclusion by 
the analysis into adjectives attempted in the last chapter. We there 



218-221] Difference of Sense and Difference of Sign 229 

analyzed aRb into a/3 and 6a. But, corresponding to every 6, there will 

be two adjectives, /3 and /3, and corresponding to every a there will also 
be two, a and Bf. Thus if R be greater , a will be 44 greater than A " 
and a 44 less than A* or vice versa . But the difference between a and a 
presupposes that between greater and less, between R and R , and therefore 
cannot explain it. Hence R and R must be distinct, and 44 aRb implies 
bRa " must be a genuine inference. 

I come now to the connection between difference of sense and 
difference of sign. We shall find that the latter is derivative from the 
former, being a difference which only exists between terms which either 
are, or are correlated with, asymmetrical relations. But in certain cases 
we shall find some complications of detail which will demand discussion. 

The difference of signs belongs, traditionally, only to numbers and 
magnitudes, and is intimately associated with addition. It may be 
allowed that the notation cannot be usefully employed where there 
is no addition, and even that, where distinction of sign is possible, 
addition in some sense is in general also possible. But we shall find 
that the difference of sign has no very intimate connection with addition 
and subtraction. To make this clear, we must, in the first place, 
clearly realize that numbers and magnitudes which have no sign are 
radically different from such as are positive. Confusion on this point is 
quite fatal to any just theory of signs. 

220. Taking first finite numbers, the positive and negative numbers 
arise as follows*. Denoting by R the relation between two integers in 
virtue of which the second is next after the first, the proposition mRn 
is equivalent to what is usually expressed by w* + 1 = n. But the present 
theory will apply to progressions generally and does not depend upon 
the logical theory of cardinals developed in Part II. In the proposition 
mRn , the integers m and w are considered, as when they result from the 
logical definition, to be wholly destitute of sign. If now mRn and nRp, 
w r e put mR*p\ and so on for higher powers. Every power of R is an 
asymmetrical relation, and its converse is easily shown to be the same 

power of R as it is itself of R. Thus mR a q is equivalent to qR a m. 
These are the two propositions which are commonly written ni + a^q 
and q — a—m . Thus the relations R a y R a are the true positive and 
negative integers; and these, though associated with a, are both wholly 
distinct from it. Thus in this case the connection with difference of 
sense is obvious and straightforward. 

221. As regards magnitudes, several cases must Ihj distinguished. 
We have (1) magnitudes which are not either relations or stretches, 
(2) stretches, (3) magnitudes which are relations. 

* I give the theory briefly here, as it will be dealt with more fully and generally 
in the chapter on Progressions, § 233. 



230 


Order 


[chap, xxvn 

(1) Magnitudes of this class are themselves neither positive nor 
negative. But two such magnitudes, as explained in Part III, determine 
either a distance or a stretch, and these are always positive or negative. 
These are moreover always capable of addition. But since our original 
magnitudes are neither relations nor stretches, the new magnitudes thus 
obtained are of a different kind from the original set. Thus the differ- 
ence of two pleasures, or the collection of pleasures intermediate between 
two pleasures, is not a pleasure, but in the one case a relation, in the 
other a class. 

(2) Magnitudes of divisibility in general have no sign, but when 
they are magnitudes of stretches they acquire sign by correlation. 
A stretch is distinguished from other collections by the fact that it 
consists of all the terms of a series intermediate between two given 
terms. By combining the stretch with one sense of the asymmetrical 
relation which must exist between its end -terms, the stretch itself 
acquires sense, and becomes asymmetrical. That is, we can distinguish 
(1) the collection of terms between a and b without regard to order, (2) 
the terms from a to b, (3) the terms from b to a. Here (2) and (3) are 
complex, being compounded of (1) and one sense of the constitutive 
relation. Of these two, one must be called positive, the other negative. 
Where our series consists of magnitudes, usage and the connection with 
addition have decided that, if a is less than b, (2) is positive and (3) is 
negative. But where, as in Geometry, our series is not composed of 
magnitudes, it becomes wholly arbitrary which is to be positive and 
which negative. In either case, we have the same relation to addition, 
which is as follows. Any pair of collections can be added to form a new 
collection, but not any pair of stretches can be added to form a new 
stretch. For this to be possible the end of one stretch must be con- 
secutive to the beginning of the other. In this way, the stretches ab , be 
can be added to form the stretch ac. If ab, be have the same sense, ac is 
greater than either; if they have different senses, ac is less than one 
of them. In this second case the addition of ab and be is regarded 
as the subtraction of ab and cb, be and cb being negative and positive 
respectively. If our stretches are numerically measurable, addition or 
subtraction of their measures will give the measure of the result of 
adding or subtracting the stretches, where these are such as to allow 
addition or subtraction. But the whole opposition of positive and 
negative, as is evident, depends upon the fundamental fact that our 
series is generated by an asymmetrical relation. 

(3) Magnitudes which are relations may be either symmetrical or 
asymmetrical relations. In the former case, if a be a term of the field 
of one of them, the other terms of the various fields, if certain conditions 
are fulfilled*, may be arranged in series according as their relations to a 
are greater or smaller. This arrangement may be different when we choose 

* Cf. § 245. 



221, 222] Difference of Sense and Difference of Sign 231 

some term other than a; for the present, therefore, we shall suppose a to 
be chosen once for all. When the terms have been arranged in a series, 
it may happen that some or all places in the series are occupied by more 
than one term; but in any case the assemblage of terms between a and 
some other term m is definite, and leads to a stretch with two senses. 
We may then combine the magnitude of the relation of a to m with one 
or other of these two senses, and so obtain an asymmetrical relation of 
a to to, which, like the original relation, will have magnitude. Thus the 
case of symmetrical relations may be reduced to that of asymmetrical 
relations. These latter lead to signs, and to addition and subtraction, 
in exactly the saftie way as stretches with sense ; the only difference being 
that the addition and subtraction are now of the kind which, in Part III, 
we called relational. Thus in all cates of magnitudes having sign, the 
difference between the two senses of an asymmetrical relation is the 
source of the difference of sign. 

The case which we discussed in connection with stretches is of 
fundamental importance in Geometry. We have here a magnitude with- 
out sign, an asymmetrical relation without magnitude, and some intimate 
connection between the two. The combination of both then gives a 
magnitude which has sign. All geometrical magnitudes having sign 
arise in this way. But there is a curious complication in the case of 
volumes. Volumes are, in the first instance, signless quantities ; but in 
analytical Geometry they always appear as positive or negative. Here 
the asymmetrical relations (for there are two) appear as terms, between 
which there is a symmetrical relation, but one which yet has an opposite 
of a kind very similar to the converse of an asymmetrical relation. 
This relation, as an exceptional case, must be here briefly discussed. 

222. The descriptive straight line is a serial relation in virtue of 
which the points of the line form a series*. Either sense of the descriptive 
straight line may be called a ray, the sense being indicated by an 


arrow. Any two non-coplanar rays have one or other of two relations, 
which may be called right and left-handedness respectively f. This 
relation is symmetrical but not transitive, and is the essence of the usual 
distinction of right and left. Thus the relation of the upward vertical 
to a line from north to east is right-handed, and to a line from south to 

* See Part VI. 

t The two cases are illustrated in the figure. The difference is the same as that 
between the two sorts of coordinate axes. 



232 


Order 


[chap, xxvii 

east is left-handed. But though the relation is symmetrical, it is 
changed into its opposite by changing either of the terms of the relation 
into its converse. That is, denoting right-handedness by R, left-handed- 

ness by L (which is not R), if A and B be two rays which are mutually 
right-handed, we shall have 

ARB , ALB, ALB , ARB , BRA, BLA, BLA , BRA . 

That is, every pair of non-coplanar straight lines gives rise to eight such 
relations, of which four are right-handed, and four left-handed. The 
difference between L and R, though not, as it stands, a difference of 
sense, is, nevertheless, the difference of positive and negative, and is the 
reason why the volumes of tetrahedra, as given by determinants, always 
have signs. But there is no difficulty in following the plain man’s 
reduction of right and left to asymmetrical relations. The plain man 
takes one of the rays (say A) as fixed — when he is sober, he takes A to 
be the upward vertical— and then regards right and left as properties of 
the single ray B , or, what conies to the same thing, as relations of any 
two points which determine B. In this way, right and left become 
asymmetrical relations, and even have a limited degree of transitiveness, of 
the kind explained in the fifth way of generating series (in Chapter xxiv). 
It is to be observed that what is fixed must be a ray, not a mere straight 
line. For example, two planes which are not mutually perpendicular 
are not one right and the other left with regard to their line of inter- 
section, but only with regard to either of the rays belonging to this 
line.* But when this is borne in mind, and when we consider, not 
semi-planes, but complete planes, through the ray in question, right and 
left become asymmetrical and each others converses. Thus the signs 
associated with right and left, like all other signs, depend upon the 
asymmetry of relations. This conclusion, therefore, may now* be allowed 
to be general. 

223. Difference of sense is, of course, more general than difference of 
sign, since it exists in cases with which mathematics (at least at present) 
is unable to deal. And difference of sign seems scarcely applicable to 
relations which are not transitive, or are not intimately connected with, 
some transitive relation. It would be absurd, for example, to regard the 
relation of an event to the time of its occurrence, or of a quantity to its 
magnitude, as conferring a difference of sign. These relations are what 
Professor Schriider calls crsclwpftf, i.e. if they hold between a and b , 
they can never hold between b and some third term. Mathematically, 
their square is null. These relations, then, do not give rise to difference 
of sign. 

* This requires that the passage from the one plane to the other should lie made 
via one of the acute angles made by their intersection. 

t Algebra der Logik, Vol. Ill, p. Professor Peirce calls such relations non- 

repeating (reference in Schroder, ib.). 



222 , 223 ] Difference of Sense and Difference of Sign 233 

All magnitudes with sign, so the above account has led us to believe, 
are either relations or compound concepts into which relations enter. 
But what are we to say of the usual instances of opposites : good and 
evil, pleasure and pain, beauty and ugliness, desire and aversion P The 
last pair are very complex, and if I were to attempt an analysis of them, 

I should emit some universally condemned opinions. With regard to 
the others, they seem to me to have an opposition of a very different 
kind from that of two mutually converse asymmetrical relations, and 
analogous rather to the opposition of red and blue, or of two different 
magnitudes of the same kind. From these oppositions, which are con- 
stituted by what may be called synthetic incompatibility *, the oppositions 
above mentioned differ only in the fact that there are only two incom- 
patible terms, instead of a whole series. The incompatibility consists 
in the fact that two terms which are thus incompatible cannot coexist in 
the same spatio-temporal place, or cannot be predicates of the same 
existent, or, more generally, cannot both enter into true propositions of 
a certain form, which differ only in the fact that one contains one of the 
incompatibles while the other contains the other. This kind of incom- 
patibility (which usually belongs, with respect to some class of proposi- 
tions, to the terms of a given series) is a most important notion in 
general logic, but is by no means to be identified with the difference 
between mutually converse relations. This latter is, in fact, a special 
case of such incompatibility; but it is the special case only that gives 
rise to the difference of sign. All difference of sign — so we may conclude 
our argument— -is primarily derived from transitive asymmetrical rela- 
tions, from which it may be extended by correlation to terms variously 
related to such relations!; but such extensions are always subsequent to 
the original opposition derived from difference of sense. 

* See The Philomphy of Leibniz, by the present author (Cambridge 1900), 
pp. 19, 20. 

t Thus in mathematical Economics, pleasure and pain may be taken as positive 
and negative without logical error, by the theory (whose psychological correctness 
we need not examine) that a man must be paid to endure pain, and must pay to 
obtain pleasure. The opposition of pleasure and pain is thus correlated with that of 
money paid and money received, which is an opposition of positive and negative in 
the sense of elementary Arithmetic. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 


ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN OPEN AND 
CLOSED SERIES. 

224. We have now come to the end of the purely logical discussions 
concerned with order, and can turn our attention with a free mind to 
the more mathematical aspects of the subject. As the solution of the 
most ancient and respectable contradictions in the notion of infinity 
depends mainly upon a correct philosophy of order, it has been necessary 
to go into philosophical questions at some length — not so much because 
they are relevant, as because most philosophers think them so. But we 
shall reap our reward throughout the remainder of this work. 

The question to be discussed in this chapter is this: Can we ulti- 
mately distinguish open from closed series, and if so, in what does 
the distinction consist? We have seen that, mathematically, all series 
are open, in the sense that all are generated by an asymmetrical transi- 
tive relation. But philosophically, we must distinguish the different 
ways in which this relation may arise, and especially we must not 
confound the case where this relation involves no reference to other 
terms with that where such terms are essential. And practically, it is 
plain that there is some difference between open and closed series — 
between, for instance, a straight line and a circle, or a pedigree and a 
mutual admiration society. But it is not quite easy to express the 
difference precisely. 

225. Where the number of terms in the series is finite, and 
the series is generated in the first of the ways explained in 
Chapter xxiv, the method of obtaining a transitive relation out of the 
intransitive relation with which we start is radically different according 
as the series is open or closed. If ft be the generating relation, and n be 
the number of terms in our series, two cases may arise. Denoting the 
relation of any term to the next but one by ft 2 , and so on for higher 
powers, the relation ft" can have only one of two values, zero and 
identity. (It is assumed that A is a one-one relation.) For starting 
with the first term, if there be one, .ft" -1 brings us to the last term ; and 
thus ft" gives no new term, and there is no instance of the relation 
ft". On the other hand, it may happen that, starting with any term, 



224 , 225 ] Difference between Open and Closed Series 235 

R n brings us back to that term again. These two are the only possible 
alternatives. In the first case, we call the series open ; in the second, we 
call it closed. In the first case, the series has a definite beginning and 
end ; in the second case, like the angles of a polygon, it has no peculiar 
terms. In the first case, our transitive asymmetrical relation is the 
disjunctive relation “a power of R not greater than the (n — l^h." 
By substituting this relation, which we may call R\ for R, our series 
becomes of the second of the six types. But in the second case no such 
simple reduction to the second type is possible. For now, the relation 
of any two terms a and m of our series may be just as well taken to be 

a power of R as a power of /?, and the question which of any three terms 
is between the other two becomes wholly arbitrary. We might now intro- 
duce, first the relation of separation of four terms, and then the resulting 
five-term relation explained in Chapter xxv. We should then regard 
three of the terms in the five-term relation as fixed, and find that the 
resulting relation of the other two is transitive and asymmetrical. But 
here the first term of our series is wholly arbitrary, which was not the 
case before ; and the generating relation is, in reality, one of five terms, 
not one of two. There is, however, in the case contemplated, a simpler 
method. This may be illustrated as follows : In an open scries, any two 
terms a and m define two senses in which the series may be described, 
the one in which a comes before w, and the other in which in comes 
before a. We can then say of any two other terms c and g that the 
sense of the order from c to g is the same as that of the order from 
a to w, or different, as the case may be. In this way, considering 
a and m fixed, and c and g variable, we get a transitive asymmetrical 
relation between c and g> obtained from a transitive symmetrical relation 
of the pair c, g to the pair a, in (or m, a , as the case may be). But this 
transitive symmetrical relation can, by the principle of abstraction, be 
analyzed into possession of a common property, which is, in this case, 
the fact that a, m and r, g have the generating relation with the same 
sense. Thus the four-term relation is, in this case, not essential. But in a 
closed series, a and m do not define a sense of the series, even when w r e 
are told that a is to precede in : we can start from a and get to in in 
either direction. But if now we take a third term d , and decide that we 
are to start from a and reach m taking d on the way, then a sense of the 
series is defined. The stretch adm includes one portion of the series, but 
not the other. Thus we may go from England to New Zealand either 
by the east or by the west ; but if we are to take India on the way, we 
must go by the east. If now we consider any other term, say k 9 this 
will have some definite position in the series which starts with a and 
reaches m by way of d. In this series, k will come either between a and 
d, or between d and m 9 or after m. Thus the three-term relation of 
a 9 d, m seems in this case sufficient to generate a perfectly definite series. 
Vailati’s five-term relation will then consist in this, that with regard to 



236 


Order 


[chap, xxvm 

the order adm , k comes before (or after) any other term l of the collection. 
But it is not necessary to call in this relation in the present case, since the 
three-term relation suffices. This three-term relation may be formally 
defined as follows. There is between any two terms of our collection a 
relation which is a power of R less than the nth. Let the relation between 
a and d be Jf®, that between a and m R y . Then if x is less than «/, we 
assign one sense to adm ; if x is greater than y, we assign the other. 

There will be also between a and d the relation R n ' x , and between a and 
m the relation R n ~ v . If x is less than y> then n - x is greater than n — y ; 

hence the asymmetry of the two cases corresponds to that of R and R. 
The terms of the series are simply ordered by correlation with their 
numbers x and «/, those with smaller numbers preceding those with 
larger ones. Thus there is here no need of the five-term relation, every- 
thing being effected by the three-term relation, which is itself reduced to 
an asymmetrical transitive relation of two numbers. But the closed 
series is still distinguished from the open one by the fact that its first 
term is arbitrary. 

226. A very similar discussion w ill apply to the case where our 
series is generated by relations of three terms. r I o keep the analogy 
with the one-one relation of the above case, we will make the following 
assumptions. Let there be a relation B of one term to two others, and 
let the one term be called the mean, the two others the extremes. Let 
the mean be uniquely determined when the extremes are given, and let 
one extreme be uniquely determined by the mean and the other extreme. 
Further let each term that occurs as mean occur also as extreme, and 
each term that occurs as extreme (with at most two exceptions) occur 
also as mean. Finally, if there be a relation in which c is mean, and b 
and d are extremes, let there be always (except when b or d is one of the 
tw r o possible exceptional terms) a relation in which b is the mean and c 
one of the extremes, and another in which d is the mean and c one of the 
extremes. Then b and c will occur together in only two relations. This 
fact constitutes a relation between b and c, and only one other term 
besides b will have this new relation to c. By means of this relation, if 
there are two exceptional terms, or if, our collection being infinite, there 
is only one, we can construct an open series. If our tw o-term relation be 
asymmetrical, this is sufficiently evident ; but the same result can be 
proved if our two-term relation is symmetrical. For there will be at 
either end, say a, an asymmetrical relation of a to the only term which is 
the mean betw f een a and some other term. This relation multiplied by 
the nth power of our two-term relation, where n + 1 is any integer less 
than the number of terms in our collection, will give a relation which 
holds between a and a number (not exceeding n + 1) of terms of our 
collection, of which terms one and only one is such that no number less 
than n gives a relation of a to this term. Thus we obtain a correlation 



225 - 227 ] Difference between Open and Closed Series 237 

of our terms with the natural numbers, which generates an open 
series with a for one of its ends. If, on the other hand, our collec- 
tion has no exceptional terms, but is finite, then we shall obtain 
a closed series. I^et our two-term relation be P, and first suppose it 
symmetrical. (It will be symmetrical if our original three-term relation 
was symmetrical with regard to the extremes.) Then every term e of 
our collection will have the relation P to two others, which will have 
to each other the relation P a . Of all the relations of the form P m 
which hold between two given terms, there will be one in which m is 
least : this may be called the principal relation of our two terms. Let 
the number of terms of the collection be n. Then every term of our 
collection will have to every other a principal relation P*, where x is 
some integer not greater than w/2. Given any two terms c and g of the 
collection, provided we do not have cP n/2 g (a case which will not arise 
if n be odd), let us have cP x g> where x is less than w/2. This assumption 
defines a sense of the series, which may be shown as follows. If cP y k, 
where y is also less than n/2, three cases may arise, assuming y is greater 
than x. We may have gP y ~ x k , or, if x+y is less than w/2, we may 

n 

have gP x + y k , or, if x+y is greater than n/2, we may have gP 2 * v k . 
(We choose always the principal relation.) These three cases are illus- 
trated in the accompanying figure. We shall say, in these three cases, 

c e o 



that, with regard to the sense eg-, (1) A; comes after c and g 9 (2) and (3) 
k conies before c and g. If y is less than x, and kP x ~ v g, we shall say 
that k is between c and g in the sense eg. If n is odd, this covers all 
possible cases. But if n is even, we have to consider the term c\ which 
is such that cP n 'V. This term is, in a certain sense, antipodal to c; we 
may define it as the first term in the series when the above method of 
definition is adopted. If n is odd, the first term will be that term of 
class (3) for which cP (n ~ l)lt k. Thus the series acquires a definite order, 
but one in which, as in all closed series, the first term is arbitrary. 

227. The only remaining case is that where we start from four-term 
relations, and the generating relation has, strictly speaking, five terms. 
This is the case of projective Geometry. Here the series is necessarily 
closed ; that is, in choosing our three fixed terms for the five-term 
relation, there is never any restriction upon our choice ; and any one of 
these three may be defined to be the first. 



238 


Order 


[chap, xxvm 

228. Thus, to sum up : Every series being generated by a transitive 
asymmetrical relation between any two terms of the series, a series is 
open when it has either no beginning, or a beginning which is not 
arbitrary ; it is closed when it has an arbitrary beginning. Now if R 
be the constitutive relation, the beginning of the series is a term having 
the relation R but not the relation R. Whenever R is genuinely a 
two-term relation, the beginning, if it exists, must be perfectly definite. 
It is only when R involves some other term (which may be considered 
fixed) besides the two with regard to which it is transitive and asym- 
metrical (which are to be regarded as variable), that the beginning can 
be arbitrary. Hence in all cases of closed series, though there may be 
an asymmetrical one-one relation if the series is discrete, the transitive 
asymmetrical relation must be one involving one or more fixed terms 
in addition to the two variable terms with regard to which it generates 
the series. Thus although, mathematically, every closed series can be 
rendered open, and every open series closed, yet there is, in regard 
to the nature of the generating relation, a genuine distinction between 
them — a distinction, however, which is of philosophical rather than 
mathematical importance. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 


PROGRESSIONS AND ORDINAL NUMBERS. 

229. It is now time to consider the simplest type of infinite series, 
namely that to which the natural numbers themselves belong. I shall 
postpone to the next Part all the supposed difficulties arising out of 
the infinity of such series, and concern myself here only to give the 
elementary theory of them in a form not presupposing numbers*. 

The series now to be considered are those which can be correlated, 
term for term, with the natural numbers, without requiring any change 
in the order of the terms. But since the natural numbers are a 
particular case of such series, and since the whole of Arithmetic and 
Analysis can be developed out of any one such series, without any 
appeal to number, it is better to give a definition of progressions which 
involves no appeal to number. 

A progression is a discrete series having consecutive terms, and a 
beginning but no end, and being also connected. The meaning of 
connection was explained in Chapter xxiv by means of number, but this 
explanation cannot be given now. Speaking popularly, when a series 
is not connected it falls into two or more parts, each being a series 
for itself. Thus numbers and instants together form a series which 
is not connected, and so do two parallel straight lines. Whenever 
a series is originally given by means of a transitive asymmetrical rela- 
tion, we can express connection by the condition that any two terms 
of our series are to have the generating relation. But progressions 
are series of the kind that may be generated in the first of our six 
ways, namely, by an asymmetrical one-one relation. In order to pass 
from this to a transitive relation, we before employed numbers, defining 
the transitive relation as any power of the one-one relation. This 
definition will not serve now, since numbers are to be excluded. It 
is one of the triumphs of modern mathematics to have adapted an 
ancient principle to the needs of this case. 

* The present chapter closely follows Peauo’s Arithmetic. See Formulaire de. 
Mathemutiijue.it , Vol. 11, § 2. 1 have given a mathematical treatment of the subject 
in RdM, Vols. Vll and Vlll. The subject is due, in the maiu, to Dedekitul and 
Georg Cantor. 



240 Order [chap, xxix 

The definition which we want is to be obtained from mathematical 
induction. This principle, which used to be regarded as a mere subter- 
fuge for eliciting results of which no other proof was forthcoming, has 
gradually grown in importance as the foundations of mathematics have 
been more closely investigated. It is now seen to be the principle upon 
which depend, so far as ordinals are concerned, the commutative law 
and one form of the distributive law*. This principle, which gives 
the widest possible extension to the finite, is the distinguishing mark 
of progressions. It may be stated as follows : 

Given any class of terms to which belongs the first term of any 
progression, and to which belongs the term of the progression next after 
any term of the progression belonging to then every term of the 
progression belongs to s. 

VVe may state the same principle in another form. Let <f>(x) be 
a propositional function, which is a determinate proposition as soon 
as x is given. Then <f>(x) is a function of ,r, and will in general be 

true or false according to the value of x. If x be a member of a 

progression, let seq x denote the term next after x. Let <f> (j?) be true 
when x is the first term of a certain progression, and let <f>( seq x) 
be true whenever <f> (x) is true, where x is any term of the progression. 
It then follows, by the principle of mathematical induction, that <l>(x) 
is always true if x be any term of the progression in question. 

The complete definition of a progression is as follows. I^et R be 
any asymmetrical one-one relation, and u a class such that every term 
of u has the relation of R to some term also belonging to the class u. 

Let there be at least one term of the class u which does not have 

the relation R to any term of a. Let s be any class to w'hich belongs 
at least one of the terms of u which do not have the relation R to any 
term of w, and to which belongs also every term of u which has the 
relation R to some term belonging to both u and s ; and let u be such 
as to be wholly contained in any class s satisfying the above conditions. 
Then u, considered as ordered bv the relation R, is a progression f. 

230. Of such progressions, everything relevant to finite Arithmetic 
can be proved. In the first place, we show that there can only be 
one term of u which does not have the relation R to any term of u. 
We then define the term to which x has the relation R as the successor 
of x (x being a w), which may be written seq x. The definitions and 
properties of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, positive and 

* Namely (n + f$)y = afi + ay. The other form, a(/3 + y) = a£ 4- ay, holds also 
for infinite ordinal numbers, and is thus independent of mathematical induction. 

t It should be observed that a discrete open series generated by a transitive 
relation can always be reduced, as we saw in the preceding chapter, to one generated 
by an asymmetrical one-one relation, provided only that the series is finite or a 
progression. 



241 


229, 230] Progressions and Ordinal Numbers 

negative terms, and rational fractions are easily given ; and it is easily 
shown that between any two rational fractions there is always a third. 
From this point it is easy to advance to irrationals and the real 
numbers*. 

Apart from the principle of mathematical induction, what is chiefly 
interesting about this process is, that it shows that only the serial or 
ordinal properties of finite numbers arc used by ordinary mathematics, 
w’hat may be called the logical properties being wholly irrelevant. By 
the logical properties of numbers, I mean their definition by means of 
purely logical ideas. This process, which has been explained in Part II, 
may be here briefly recapitulated. We show, to begin with, that a one- 
one correlation can be effected between any two null classes, or between 
any two classes u , v which are such that, if x is a w, and x differs from 
.r, then x cannot be a u, with a like condition for v. The possibility 
of such one-one correlation we call similarity of the two classes u , v . 
Similarity, being symmetrical and transitive, must be analyzable (by the 
principle of abstraction) into possession of a common property. This 
we define as the number of either of the classes. When the two classes 
i/, v have the above-defined property, we say their number is one ; and 
so on for higher numbers ; the general definition of finite numbers 
demanding mathematical induction, or the non -similarity of whole and 
part, but being always given in purely logical terms. 

It is numbers so defined that are used in daily life, and that are 
essential to any assertion of numbers. It is the fact that numbers have 
these logical properties that makes them important. But it is not 
these properties that ordinary mathematics employs, and numbers might 
be bereft of them without any injury to the truth of Arithmetic and 
Analysis. What is relevant to mathematics is solely the fact that 
finite numbers form a progression. This is the reason why mathe- 
maticians — e.g. Helmholtz, Dedckind, and Kronecker — have maintained 
that ordinal numbers are prior to cardinals ; for it is solely the ordinal 
properties of number that are relevant. But the conclusion that or- 
dinals are prior to cardinals seems to have resulted from a confusion. 
Ordinals and cardinals alike form a progression, and have exactly the 
same ordinal properties. Of either, all Arithmetic can be proved 
without any appeal to the other, the propositions being symbolically 
identical, but different in meaning. In order to prove that ordinals 
are prior to cardinals, it would be necessary to show that the cardinals 
can only be defined in terms of the ordinals. But this is false, for the 
logical definition of the cardinals is wholly independent of the ordinalsf. 
There seems, in fact, to be nothing to choose, as regards logical priority, 
between ordinals and cardinals, except that the existence of the ordinals 

* See my article on the Logic of Relations, RdM, VII. 

t Professor Peano, who has a rare immunity from error, has recognized this fact. 
See Formulaire, 1898, 210, note (p. 39). 



242 


Order 


[chap, xxix 

is inferred from the series of cardinals. The ordinals, as we shall see 
in the next paragraph, can be defined without any appeal to the 
cardinals; but when defined, they are seen to imply the cardinals. 
Similarly, the cardinals can be defined without any appeal to the 
ordinals ; but they essentially form a progression, and all progressions, 
as I shall now show, necessarily imply the ordinals. 

231. The correct analysis of ordinals has been prevented hitherto by 
the prevailing prejudice against relations. People speak of a series as 
consisting of certain terms taken in a certain order, and in this idea 
there is commonly a psychological element. All sets of terms have, 
apart from psychological considerations, all orders of which they are 
capable ; that is, there are serial relations, whose fields are a given set of 
terms, which arrange those terms in any possible order. In some cases, 
one or more serial relations are specially prominent, either on account of 
their simplicity, or of their importance. Thus the order of magnitude 
among numbers, or of before and after among instants, seems emphati- 
cally the natural order, and any other seems to be artificially introduced 
by our arbitrary choice. But this is a sheer error. Omnipotence itself 
cannot give terms an order which they do not possess already: all that 
is psychological is the consideration of such and such an order. Thus 
when it is said that we can arrange a set of terms in any order we please, 
what is really meant is, that we can consider any of the serial relations 
whose field is the given set, and that these serial relations will give 
between them any combinations of before and after that are compatible 
with transitiveness and connection. From this it results that an order 
is not, properly speaking, a property of a given set of terms, but of a serial 
relation whose field is the given set. Given the relation, its field is given 
with it ; but given the field, the relation is by no means given. The 
notion of a set of terms in a given order is the notion of a set of terms 
considered as the field of a given serial relation ; but the consideration 
of the terms is superfluous, and that of the relation alone is quite 
sufficient. 

We may, then, regard an ordinal number as a common property of 
sets of serial relations which generate ordinally similar series. Such 
relations have what I shall call likeness , i.e. if P, Q be two such relations, 
their fields can be so correlated term for term that two terms of which 
the first has to the second the relation P will always be correlated with 
two terms of which the first has to the second the relation Q, and 
vice versd . As in the case of cardinal numbers*, so here, we may, in 
virtue of the principle of abstraction, define the ordinal number of 
& given finite serial relation as the class of like relations. It is easy to 
show that the generating relations of progressions are all alike; the 
class of such relations will be the ordinal number of the finite integers 
in order of magnitude. When a class is finite, all series that can be 

* Cf. § 111. 



243 


230 - 232 ] Progressions and Ordinal Numbers 

formed of its terms are ordinally similar, and are ordinally different from 
series having a different cardinal number of terms. Hence there is a 
one-one correlation of finite ordinals and cardinals, for which, as we 
shall see in Part V, there is no analogy in respect of infinite numbers. We 
may therefore define the ordinal number n as the class of serial relations 
whose domain ,v have n terms, where n is a finite cardinal. It is necessary, 
unless 1 is to be excluded, to take domains instead of' fields here, for no 
relation which implies diversity can have one term in its field, though it 
may have none. This has a practical inconvenience, owing to the fact 
that n 4 - 1 must be obtained by adding one term to the field; but the 
point involved is one for conventions as to notation, and is quite 
destitute of philosophical importance. 

232. The above definition of ordinal numbers is direct and simple, 
but does not yield the notion of “ nth,” which would usually be regarded 
as the ordinal number. This notion is far more complex : a term is not 
intrinsically the nth, and does not become so by the inert? specification 
of n — 1 other terms. A term is the nth in respect of a certain serial 
relation, when, in respect of that relation, the term in question has n — 1 
predecessors. This is the definition of “ nth,” showing that this notion 
is relative, not merely to predecessors, but also to a specified serial 
relation. By induction, the various finite ordinals can be defined 
without mentioning the cardinals. A finite serial relation is one which 
is not like (in the above sense) any relation implying it but not ecjui valent 
to it ; and a finite ordinal is one consisting of finite serial relations. If 
n be a finite ordinal, n + 1 is an ordinal such that, if the last term* of 
a series of the type n 4-1 be cut off, the remainder, in the same order, is 
of the type n . In more technical language, a serial relation of the type 
7i + l is one which, when confined to its domain instead of its field, 
becomes of the type n. This gives by induction a definition of every 
particular finite ordinal, in which cardinals are never mentioned. Thus 
we cannot say that ordinals presuppose cardinals, though they are more 
complex, since they presuppose both serial and one-one relations, whereas 
cardinals only presuppose one-one relations. 

Of the ordinal number of the finite ordinals in order of magnitude, 
several equivalent definitions may be given. One of the simplest is, 
that this number belongs to any serial relation, which is such that any 
class contained in its field and not null has a first term, while every 
term of the series has an immediate successor, and every term except the 
first has an immediate predecessor. Here, again, cardinal numbers are 
in no way presupposed. 

Throughout the above discussions our serial relations are taken to be 
transitive, not one-one. The one-one relations are easily derived from 

* The last term of a series (if it exists) is the term belonging to the converse 
domain but not to the domain of the generating relation, i.e. the term which is after 
but not before other terms. 



244 


Order 


[chap, xxix 

the transitive ones, while the converse derivation is somewhat complicated. 
Moreover the one-one relations are only adequate to define finite series, 
and thus their use cannot be extended to the study of infinite series 
unless they are taken as derivative from the transitive ones. 

233. A few words concerning positive and negative ordinals seem to 
be here in place. If the first n terms of a progression be taken away 
(n being any finite number), the remainder still form a progression. 
With regard to the new progression, negative ordinals may be assigned 
to the terms that have been abstracted; but for this purpose it is 
convenient to regard the beginning of the smaller progression as the 
Oth term. In order to have a series giving my positive or negative 
ordinal, we need what may be called a double progression. This is a 
series such that, choosing any term x out of it, two progressions start 

from .r, the one generated by a serial relation /?, the other by R. To 
x we shall then assign the ordinal 0, and to the other terms we shall 
assign positive or negative ordinals according as they belong to the one 
or the other of the two progressions starting from x. The positive and 
negative ordinals themselves form such a double progression. They 
express essentially a relation to the arbitrarily chosen origin of the two 
progressions, and +n and —n express mutually converse relations. 
Thus they have all the properties which we recognize in Chapter xxvn 
as characterizing terms which have signs. 



CHAPTER XXX. 


DEDEKIND’S THEORY OF NUMBER. 

234. Thk theory of progressions and of ordinal numbers, w ith which 
we have been occupied in the last chapter, is due in the main to two 
men — Dedekind and Cantor. Cantor’s contributions, being specially 
concerned with infinity, need not be considered at present; and 
Dedekind’s theory of irrationals is also to be postponed. It is his theory 
of integers of which I wish now to give an account — the theory, that is 
to say, which is contained in his “ Wassind uiul wax xollen die Zahlen 

In reviewing this work, I shall not adhere strictly to Dedekind’s 
phraseology. He apjx'ars to have been, at the time of writing, un- 
acquainted with symbolic logic ; and although he invented as much of 
this subject as was relevant to his purpose, he naturally adopted phrases 
which were not usual, and were not always so convenient as their con- 
ventional equivalents. 

The fundamental ideas of the pamphlet in question are thesef: 
(I) the representation ( Abhildnng ) of a system (21); (2) the notion of a 
chain (37) ; (3) the chain of an element (44) ; (4) the generalized form 
of mathematical induction (59) ; (5) the definition of a singly infinite 
system (71). From these five notions Dedekind deduces numbers and 
ordinary Arithmetic. Let us first explain the notions, and then examine 
the deduction. 

235. (1) A representation of a class n is any law by which, to every 
term of «, say jr , corresponds some one and only one term <f>(x). No 
assumption is made, to begin with, as to whether <f>(x) belongs to the 
class u, or as to whether <f>( jj may be the same as <f>(y), when x and y 
are different terms of u. The definition thus amounts to this : 

A reprexentution of a class u is a many-one relation, whose domain 
contains «, by which terms, which may or may not also belong to «, are 

* 2nd ed. Brunswick, 181)3 (1st ed. 1887). The principal contents of this 
book, expressed by the Algebra of Relations, will be found in my article in KdM, 
VII, 2, 3. 

t The numbers in brackets refer, not to pages, but to the small sections into 
which the work is divided. 



246 Order [chap, xxx 

correlated one with each of the terms of u*. The representation is 
similar when, if x differs from y, both being u\ then <f>(x) differs from 
<l>(y); that is, when the relation in question is one-one. He shows that 
similarity between classes is reflexive, symmetrical and transitive, and 
remarks (64) that classes can be classified by similarity to a given class — 
a suggestion of an idea which is fundamental in Cantor’s work. 

236. (2) If there exists a relation, whether one-one or many-one, 
which correlates with a class 7i only terms belonging to that class, then 
this relation is said to constitute a representation of ?/ in itself ( 36 ), 
and with respect to this relation u is called a chain (37). That is to 
say, any class u is, with respect to any many -one relation, a chain, if n is 
contained in the domain of the relation, and the correlate of a u is 
always itself a u. The collection of correlates of a class is called the 
image (Bild) of the class. Thus a chain is a class whose image is 
part or the w hole of itself. For the benefit of the non -mathematical 
reader, it may be not superfluous to remark that a chain with regard to 
a one-one relation, provided it has any term not belonging to the image 
of the chain, cannot be finite, for such a chain must contain the same 
number of terms as a proper part of itself f. 

237. (3) If a be any term or collection of terms, there may be, 
with respect to a given many-one relation, many chains in which a is 
contained. The common part of all these chains, which is denoted by a oy 
is what Dcdekind calls the chain of a (44). For example, if a be the 
number w, or any set of numbers of which n is the least, the chain of a 
with regard to the relation “less by 1” will be all numbers not less 
than n. 

238. (4) Dedekind now proceeds (59) to a theorem which is 
a generalized form of mathematical induction. This theorem is as 
follows : I^et a be any term or set of terms contained in a class ,v, and let 
the image of the common part of s and the chain of a be also contained 
in .v ; then it follows that the chain of a is contained in .v. This some- 
what complicated theorem may become clearer by being put in other 
language. Ix;t us call the relation by which the chain is generated (or 
rather the converse of this relation) succession, so that the correlate or 
image of a term will be its successor. Ix*t a be a term which has a 
successor, or a collection of such terms. A chain in general (with regard 
to succession) will be any set of terms such that the successor of any 
one of them also belongs to the set. The chain of a will be the common 


* A many-one relation is one in which, as in the relation of a quantity to its 
magnitude, the right-hand term, to which the relation is, is uniquely determined 
when the left-hand term is given. Whether the converse holds is left undecided. 
Thus a one-one relation is a particular case of a many-one relation. 

f A profter part (Echter Theil) is a phrase analogous to “proper fraction” ; it 
means a part not the whole. 



247 


235-240] Dedekind's Theory of Number 

part of all the chains containing a, Then the data of the theorem 
inform us that a is contained in s, and, if any term of the chain of a be 
an s, so is its successor; and the conclusion is, that every term in the 
chain of a is an s. This theorem, as is evident, is very similar to 
mathematical induction, from which it differs, first by the fact that a 
need not be a single term, secondly by the fact that the constitutive 
relation need not be one-one, but may be many-one. It is a most 
remarkable fact that Dedekinds previous assumptions suffice to demon- 
strate this theorem. 

239. (5) I come next to the definition of a singly infinite system 
or class (71). This is defined as a class which can be represented in 
itself by means of a one-one relation, and which is further such as to be 
the chain, with regard to this one-one relation, of a single term of the 
class not contained in the image of the class. Calling the class A^, and 
the one-one relation R , there are, as Dedekind remarks, four points in 
this definition. (1) The image of N is contained in JV; that is, every 
term to which an N has the relation R is an N. (2) N is the chain of 
one of its terms. (3) This one term is such that no N has the relation 
R to it, i.e. it is not the image of any other term of N. (4) The 
relation R is one-one, in other words, the representation is similar. The 
abstract system, defined simply as possessing these properties, is defined 
by Dedekind as the ordinal numbers (73). It is evident that his singly 
infinite system is the same as what we called a progression , and he 
proceeds to deduce the various properties of progressions, in particular 
mathematical induction (80), which follows from the above generalized 
form. One number m is said to be less than another //, when the chain 
of n is contained in the image of the chain of m (89) ; and it is shown 
(88, 90) that of two different numbers, one must be the less. From this 
point everything proceeds simply. 

240. The only further point that seems important for our present 
purpose is the definition of cardinals. It is shown (132) that all singly 
infinite systems are similar to each other and to the ordinals, and that 
conversely (133) any system which is similar to a singly infinite system 
is singly infinite. When a system is finite, it is similar to some system 
Z n , where Z n means all the numbers from 1 to n both inclusive ; and 
vice versa (160). There is only one number n which has this property 
in regard to any given finite system, and when considered in relation 
to this property it is called a cardinal number , and is said to be the 
number of elements of which the said system consists (161). Here 
at last we reach the cardinal numbers. Their dependence on ordinals, 
if I mav venture to interpret Dedekind, is as follows: owing to the 
older of the ordinals, every ordinal n defines a class of ordinals Z„, 
consisting of all that do not succeed it. They may be defined as all 
that are not contained in the image of the chain of n . This class of 
ordinals may be similar to another class, which is then said to have the 



248 Order [chap, xxx 

canlinal number n. But it is only liecause of the order of the ordinals 
that each of them defines a class, and thus this order is presupposed in 
obtaining cardinals. 

241. Of the merits of the above deduction it is not necessary for 
me to speak, for they are universally acknowledged. But some points 
call for discussion. In the first case, Dedekind proven mathematical 
induction, while Beano regards it as an axiom. This gives Dedekind 
an apparent superiority, which must Ik* examined. In the second place, 
there is no reason, merely lKcause the numbers which Dedekind obtains 
have an order, to hold that they are ordinal numbers ; in the third 
place, his definition of cardinals is unnecessarily complicated, and the 
dependence of cardinals upon order is only apparent. I shall take these 
points in turn. 

As regards the proof of mathematical induction, it is to be* observed 
that, it makes the practically equivalent assumption that numl>ers form 
the chain of one of them. Either can be deduced from the other, and 
the choice as to which is to Ik an axiom, which a theorem, is mainly 
a matter of taste. On the whole, though the consideration of chains 
is most ingenious, it is somewhat difficult, and has the disadvantage 
that theorems concerning the finite class of numbers not greater than n 
as a rule have to be deduced from corresponding theorems concerning 
the infinite class of numbers greater than n. For these reasons, and 
not because of any logical superiority, it seems simpler to begin with 
mathematical induction. And it should be observed that, in Beano's 
method, it is only when theorems are to be proved concerning any 
number that mathematical induction is required. The elementary 
Arithmetic of our childhood, which discusses only particular numbers, 
is wholly independent of mathematical induction ; though to prove that 
this is so for even / particular number would itself require mathematical 
induction. In Dedekind’s method, on the other hand, propositions 
concerning particular numbers, like general propositions, demand the 
consideration of chains. Tims there is, in Beano’s method, a distinct 
advantage of simplicity, and a clearer sejmration between the particular 
and the general propositions of Arithmetic. But from a purely logical 
point of view, the two methods seem equally sound; and it is to Ik 
remembered that, with the logical theory of cardinals, both Beano's and 
Dedekind’s axioms become demonstrable*. 

242. On the second point, there is some deficiency of clearness in 
what Dedekind says. His words are (7#): “If in the contemplation 
of a singly infinite system N, ordered by a representation we disregard 
entirely the; jieculiar nature of the elements, retaining only the possibility 
of distinguishing them, and considering only the relations in which they 
are placed by the ordering representation <f > , then these elements are 
called natural numbers or ordinal numbers or simply numbers." Now 

* (Jf. Chap. xiu. 



249 


240 - 243 ] Dedehind's Theory of Numbci* 

it is impossible that this account should be quite correct. For it implies 
that the terms of all progressions other than the ordinals are complex, 
and that the ordinals are elements in all such terms, obtainable by 
abstraction. But this is plainly not the case. A progression can be 
formed of points or instants, or of transfinitc ordinals, or of cardinals, 
in which, as we shall shortly see, the ordinals are not elements. More- 
over it is impossible that the ordinals should be, as Dedckind suggests, 
nothing but the terms of such relations as constitute a progression. 
If they are to be anything at all, they must be intrinsically something; 
they must differ from other entities as points from instants, or colours 
from sounds. What Dedekind intended to indicate was probably a 
definition by means of the principle of abstraction, such as we attempted 
to give in the preceding chapter. But a definition so made always 
indicates some class of entities having (or being) a genuine nature of 
their own, and not logically dependent upon the manner in which they 
have been defined. The entities defined should lx* visible, at least to 
the mind's eye ; what the principle asserts is that, under certain con- 
ditions, there are such entities, if only we knew where to look for them. 
But whether, when we have found them, they will be ordinals or 
cardinals, or even something quite different, is not to be decided 
off-hand. And in any case. Dedekind docs not show us what it is 
that all progressions have in common, nor give any reason for supposing 
it to be the ordinal numbers, except that all progressions obey the same 
laws as ordinals do, which would prove equally that any assigned 
progression is what all progressions have in common. 

243. This brings us to the third point, namely the definition of 
cardinals by means of ordinals. Dedekind remarks in his preface (p. ix) 
that many will not recognize their old friends the natural numbers in 
the shadowy shapes which he introduces to them. In this, it seems 
to me, the supposed persons are in the right — in other words, I am one 
among them. What Dedekind presents to us is not the numbers, 
but any progression : what he says is true of all progressions alike, 
and his demonstrations nowhere — not even where he comes to cardinals — 
involve any property distinguishing numbers from other progressions. 
No evidence is brought forward to show that numbers are prior to 
other progressions. We are told, indeed, that they are what all pro- 
gressions have in common ; but no reason is given for thinking that 
progressions have anything in common beyond the properties assigned 
in the definition, which do not themselves constitute a new progression. 
The fact is that all depends upon one-one relations, which Dedekind 
has lxen using throughout without perceiving that they alone suffice 
for the definition of cardinals. The relation of similarity between 
classes, which he employs consciously, combined with the principle of 
abstraction, which he implicitly assumes, suffice for the definition of 
cardinals; for the definition of ordinals these do not suffice; we 



250 


Order 


[chap, xxx 


require, as we saw in the preceding chapter, the relation of likeness 
between well-ordered serial relations. The definition of particular 
finite ordinals is effected explicitly in terms of the corresponding 
cardinals: if n be a finite cardinal number, the ordinal number n is 
the class of serial relations which have n terms in their domain 
(or in their field, if we prefer this definition). In order to define 
the notion of “nth," we need, besides the ordinal number n, the 
notion of powers of a relation, i.e. of the relative product of a rela- 
tion multiplied into itself a finite number of times. Thus if R be any 
one-one serial relation, generating a finite series or a progression, the first 
term of the field of R (which field we will call r) is the term belonging 
to the domain, but not to the converse domain, i.e., having the relation 
R but not the relation R. If r has n or more terms, where n is a finite 
number, the wth term of r is the term to which the first term has the 
relation R n ~\ or, again, it is the term having the relation R n ~ l but not 
the relation R n . Through the notion of powers of a relation, the 
introduction of cardinals is here unavoidable ; and as powers are defined 
by mathematical induction, the notion of nth, according to the above 
definition, cannot be extended beyond finite numl)ers. We can however 
extend the notion by the following definition : If P be a transitive 
aliorclative generating a well-ordered series p, the wth term of p is the 
term .r such that, if P be the relation P limited to jr and its pre- 
decessors, then P has the ordinal number n. Here the dependence 
upon cardinals results from the fact that the ordinal n can, in general, 
only be defined by means of the cardinal n. 

It is important to observe that no set of terms has inherently one 
order rather than another, and that no term is the wth of a set except 
in relation to a particular generating relation whose field is the set or 
part of the set. For example, since in any progression, any finite 
number of consecutive terms including the first may be taken away, 
and the remainder will still form a progression, the ordinal number 
of a term in a progression may be diminished to any smaller number 
we choose. Thus the ordinal number of a term is relative to the series 
to which it belongs. This may be reduced to a relation to the first 
term of the series ; and lest a vicious circle should be suspected, it may 
be explained that the first term can always be defined non-numerically. 
It is, in Dedekind’s singly infinite system, the only term not contained 
in the image of the system ; and generally, in any series, it is the only 
term which has the constitutive relation with one sense, but not with 
the other*. Thus the relation expressed by ath is not only a relation 
to n, but also to the first term of the series ; and first itself depends 


* Though when the series has two ends, we have to make an arbitrary selection 
as to which we will call first, which hist. 'Hie obviously noil-numerical nature of 
last illustrates that of its correlative, first. 



251 


243] DedckincTs Theory of Number 

upon the terms included in the series, and upon the relation by which 
they are ordered, so that what was first may cease to be so, and what 
was not first may become so. Thus the first term of a series must be 
assigned, as is done in Dedekind's view of a progression as the chain 
of its first term. Hence ?ith expresses a four-cornered relation, between 
the term which is nth, an assigned term (the first), a generating serial 
relation, and the cardinal number n. Thus it is plain that ordinals, 
either as classes of like serial relations, or as notions like “nth , 11 arc 
more complex than cardinals; that the logical theory of cardinals is 
wholly independent of the general theory of progressions, requiring 
independent development in order to show that the cardinals form a 
progression ; and that Dedekind's ordinals are not essentially either 
ordinals or cardinals, but the members of any progression whatever. 
I have dwelt on this point, as it is important, and my opinion is at 
variance with that of most of the best authorities. If Dedekind's view 
were correct, it would have been a logical error to begin, as this work 
does, with the theory of cardinal numbers rather than with order. 
For my part, I do not hold it an absolute error to begin with order, 
since the properties of progressions, and even most of the properties of 
series in general, seem to be largely independent of number. But 
the properties of number must be capable of proof without appeal to 
the general properties of progressions, since cardinal numbers can be 
independently defined, and must be seen to form a progression before 
theorems concerning progressions can be applied to them. Hence the 
question, whether to begin with older or with numbers, resolves itself 
into one of convenience and simplicity ; and from this point of view, 
the cardinal numbers seem naturally to precede the very difficult con- 
siderations as to series which have occupied us in the present Fart. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 


DISTANCE. 

244. The notion of distance is one which is often supposed essential 
to series*, but which seldom receives precise definition. An emphasis on 
distance characterizes, generally speaking, those who believe in relative 
position. Thus Leibniz, in the course of his controversy with Clarke, 
remarks : 

“As for the objection, that space and time are quantities, or rather 
things endowed with quantity, and that situation and order are not 
so: 1 answer, that order also has its quantity; there is that in it which 
goes before, and that which follows; there is distance or interval. 
Relative things have their quantity, as well as absolute ones. For 
instance, ratios or proportions in mathematics have their quantity, and 
arc measured by logarithms; and yet they are relations. And therefore, 
though time and space consist in relations, yet they have their 
quantity t.” 

In this passage, the remark : “There is that which goes before, and 
that which follows; there is distance or interval,” if considered as an 
inference, is a non sequitur ; the mere fact of order does not prove that 
there is distance or interval. It proves, as we have seen, that there 
arc stretches, that these are capable of a special form of addition 
closely analogous to what I have called relational addition, that they 
have sign, and that (theoretically at least) stretches which fulfil the 
axioms of Archimedes and of linearity are always capable of numerical 
measurement. But the idea, as Meinong rightly points out, is entirely 
distinct from that of stretch. Whether any particular series does or 
does not contain distances, will be, in most compact series (i.e. such as 
have a term between any two), a question not to be decided by argument 
In discrete series there must be distance; in others, there may be — 
unless, indeed, they are series obtained from progressions as the 
rational* or the real numbers are obtained from the integers, in which 

* E.g. by Meinong, op. cit. § 17. 
t Phil. Werke , Gerhardt’s ed. Vol. vu, p. 404. 



Distance 


253 


244, 245] 

case there must be distance. But we shall find that stretches are mathe- 
matically sufficient, and that distances are complicated and unimportant. 

245. The definition of distance, to begin with, is no easy matter. 
What has been done hitherto towards this end is chiefly due to non- 
Euclidean Geometry*; something also has been done towards settling the 
definition by Meinongf. But in both these cases, there is more concern for 
numerical measurement of distance than for its actual definition. Never- 
theless, distance is by no means indefinable. Ix‘t us endeavour to genera- 
lize the notion as much as possible. In the first place, distance need not 
be asymmetrical; but the other properties of distance always allow us to 
render it so, and we may therefore take it to be so. Secondly, a distance 
need not be a quantity or a magnitude ; although it is usually taken to 
be such, we shall find the taking it so to be irrelevant to its other 
properties, and in particular to its numerical measurement. Thirdly, 
when distance is taken asymmetrically, there must be only one term to 
which a given term has a given distance, and the converse relation to the 
given distance must be a distance of the same kind. (It will be observed 
that we must first define a kind of distance, and proceed thence to the 
general definition of distance.) Thus every distance is a one-one 
relation; and in respect to such relations it is convenient to respect the 
converse of a relation as its -1th power. Further the relative product 
of two distances of a kind must be a distance of the same kind. When 
the two distances are mutually converse, their product will be identity, 
which is thus one among distances (their zero, in fact), and must be the 
only one which is not asymmetrical. Again the product of two distances 
of a kind must be commutative^. If the distances of a kind be magni- 
tudes, they must form a kind of magnitude — i.e. any two must be equal 
or unequal. If they are not magnitudes, they must still form a series 
generated in the second of our six ways, i.e. every pair of different 
distances must have a certain asymmetrical relation, the same for all 
pairs except as regards sense. And finally, if Q be this relation, and 
R\ QR 2 (R» Rn being distances of the kind), then if if 3 be any other 
distance of the kind, we must have R\ R 3 QR 2 R 3 . All these properties, 
so far as I can discover, are independent; and we ought to add a 
property of the field, namely this : any two terms, each of which belongs 
to the field of some distance of the kind (not necessarily the same for 
both), have a relation which is a distance of the kind. Having now 
defined a kind of distance, a distance is any relation belonging to some 
kind of distance; and thus the work of definition seems completed. 

The notion of distance, it will be seen, is enormously complex. The 
properties of distances are analogous to those of stretches with sign, but 

* See e.g. Whitehead, Universal Algebra, Cambridge, 1898, Book vi. Chap. i. 

t Op. cit. Section iv. 

I This is an independent property ; consider for instance the difference between 
“ maternal grandfather” and “paternal grandmother.” 



254 


Order 


[chap, xxxi 

are far less capable of mutual deduction. The properties of stretches 
corresponding to many of the above properties of distances are capable 
of proof. The difference is largely due to the fact that stretches can be 
added in the elementary logical (not arithmetical) way, whereas distances 
require what I have called relational addition, which is much the same as 
relative multiplication. 

246. The numerical measurement of distances has already been par- 
tially explained in Part III. It requires, as we saw, for its full application, 
two further postulates, which, however, do not belong to the definition of 
distances, but to certain kinds of distances only. These are, the postu- 
late of Archimedes : given any two distances of a kind, there exists 
a finite integer n such that the nth power of the first distance is greater 
than the second distance; and Du Bois Rey in ond’s postulate of linearity: 
Any distance has an nth root, where n is any integer (or any prime, 
whence the result follows for any integer). When these two postulates 
are satisfied, we can find a meaning for H x > where R is a distance of the 
kind other than identity, and x is any real number*. Moreover, any 
distance of the kind is of the form R x , for some value of x. And x is, 
of course, the numerical measure of the distance. 

In the case of series generated in the first of our six ways, the various 
powers of the generating relation R give the distances of terms. These 
various powers, as the reader can see for himself, verify all the above 
characteristics of distances. In the case of series generated from pro- 
gressions as rationals or real numbers from integers, there are always 
distances; thus in the case of the rationals themselves, which are one- 
one relations, their differences, which a re again rationals, measure or 
indicate relations between them, and these relations are of the nature of 
distances. And we shall see, in Part V, that these distances have some 
importance in connection with limits. For numerical measurement in 
some form is essential to certain theorems about limits, and the nume- 
rical measurement of distances is apt to be more practically feasible than 
that of stretches. 

247. On the general question, however, whether series unconnected 
with number — for instance spatial and temporal series — are such as to 
contain distances, it is difficult to speak positively. Some things may 
be said against this view. In the first place, there must be stretches, and 
these must be magnitudes. It then becomes a sheer assumption — which 
must be set up as an axiom — that equal stretches correspond to equal 
distances. This may, of course, be denied, and we might even seek an 

* The powers of distances are here understood in the sense resulting from relative 
multiplication ; thus if a and b have the same distance as b and c, this distance is the 
square root of the distance of a and c. The postulate of linearity, whose expression 
in ordinary language is: “ every linear quantity can be divided into n equal parts, 
where n is any integer,” will be found in Du Bois Reymond’s AUgemeine Functionm- 
theorie (Tubingen, 11182), p. 40. 



Distance 


255 


245-248] 

interpretation of non-Euclidean Geometry in the denial. We might 
regard the usual coordinates as expressing stretches, and the logarithms 
of their anharmonic ratios as expressing distances; hyperbolic Geometry, 
at least, might thus find a somewhat curious interpretation. Herr 
Meinong, who regards all series as containing distances, maintains an 
analogous principle with regard to distance and stretch in general. The 
distance, he thinks, increases only as the logarithm of the stretch. It 
may be observed that, where the distance itself is a rational number 
(which is possible, since rationals are one-one relations), the opposite 
theory can be made formally convenient by the following fact. The 
square of a distance, as we saw generally, is said to be twice as great as 
the distance whose square it is. We might, where the distance is a 
rational, say instead that the stretch is twice as great, but that the 
distanc'e is truly the square of the former distance. For where the 
distance is already numerical, the usual interpretation of numerical 
measurement conflicts with the notation RK Thus we shall he com- 
pelled to regard the stretch as proportional to the logarithm of the 
distance. But since, outside the theory of progressions, it is usually 
doubtful whether there are distances, and since, in almost all other 
series, stretches seem adequate for all the results that are obtainable, the 
retention of distance adds a complication for which, as a rule, no 
necessity appears. It is therefore generally better, at least in a philo- 
sophy of mathematics, to eschew distances except in the theory of 
progressions, and to measure them, in that theory, merely by the 
indices of the powers of the generating relation. There is no logical 
reason, so far as I know, to suppose that there are distances elsewhere, 
except in a finite space of two dimensions and in a projective space ; and 
if there are, they are not mathematically important. We shall see in 
Part VI how the theory of space and time may be developed without pre- 
supposing distance; the distances which appear in projective Geometry are 
derivative relations, not required in defining the properties of our space ; 
and in Part V we shall see how few are the functions of distance with 
regard to series in general. And as against distance it may be remarked 
that, if every series must contain distances, an endless regress becomes 
unavoidable, since every kind of distance is itself a series. This is not, 
I think, a logical objection, since the regress is of the logically permis- 
sible kind ; but it shows that great complications are introduced by 
regarding distances as essential to every series. On the whole, then, it 
seems doubtful whether distances in general exist ; and if they do, their 
existence seems unimportant and a source of very great complications. 

248. We have now completed our review of order, in so far as is 
possible without introducing the difficulties of continuity and infinity. 
We have seen that all order involves asymmetrical transitive relations, and 
that every series as such is open. But closed series, we found, could be 
distinguished by the mode of their generation, and by the fact that, 



256 


Order 


[chap, xxxi 

though they always have a first term, this term may always be selected 
arbitrarily. We saw that asymmetrical relations must be sometimes 
unanalyzable, and that when analyzable, other asymmetrical relations 
must appear in the analysis. The difference of sign, we found, depends 
always upon the difference between an asymmetrical relation and its 
converse. In discussing the particular type of series which we called 
progressions, we saw how all Arithmetic applies to every such series, and 
how finite ordinals may be defined by means of them. Hut though we 
found this theory to be to a certain extent independent of the cardinals, 
we saw no reason to agree with Dedekind in regarding cardinals as 
logically subsequent to ordinals. Finally, we agreed that distance is 
a notion which is not essential to series, and of little importance outside 
Arithmetic. With this equipment, we shall be able, I hope, to dispose 
of all the difficulties which philosophers have usually found in infinity 
and continuity. If this can be accomplished, one of the greatest of 
philosophical problems will have been solved. To this problem Part V 
is to be devoted. 



PART V. 


INFINITY AND CONTINUITY. 




CHAPTER XXXII. 


THE CORRELATION OF SERIES. 

249. We come now to what ha s been generally considered the 
fundamental problem of mathematical philosophy — I mean, the problem 
of infinity and continuity. This problem has undergone, through the 
labours of Weierstrass and Cantor, a complete transformation. Since 
the time of Newton and Leibniz, the nature of infinity and continuity 
had been sought in discussions of the so-called Infinitesimal Calculus. 
But it has been shown that this Calculus is not, as a matter of fact, 
in any way concerned with the infinitesimal, and that a large and most 
important branch of mathematics is logically prior to it. The problem 
of continuity, moreover, has been to a great extent separated from that 
of infinity. It was formerly supposed— and herein lay the real strength 
of Kant’s mathematical philosophy— that continuity had an essential 
reference to space and time, and that the Calculus (as the word fluxion 
suggests) in some way presupposed motion or at least change. In this 
view, the philosophy of space and time was prior to that of continuity, 
the Transcendental Aesthetic preceded the Transcendental Dialectic, and 
the antinomies (at least the mathematical ones) were essentially spatio- 
temporal. All this has been changed by modern mathematics. What 
is called the arithmetization of mathematics has shown that all the 
problems presented, in this respect, by space and time, are already 
present in pure arithmetic. The theory of infinity has two forms, 
cardinal and ordinal, of which the former springs from the logical 
theory of number ; the theory of continuity is purely ordinal. In the 
theory of continuity and the ordinal theory of infinity, the problems 
that arise are not specially concerned with numbers, but with all series 
of certain types which occur in arithmetic and geometry alike. What 
makes the problems in question peculiarly easy to deal with in the case 
of numbers is, that the series of rationals, which is what I shall call a 
compact series, arises from a progression, namely that of the integers, and 
that this fact enables us to give a proper name to every term of the 
series of rationals — a point in which this series differs from others of the 
same type. But theorems of the kind which will occupy us in most of 



260 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxii 

the following chapters, though obtained in arithmetic, have a far wider 
application, since they are purely ordinal, and involve none of the 
logical properties of numbers. That is to say, the idea which the 
Germans call Anzafd , the idea of the number of terms in some class, 
is irrelevant, save only in the theory of transfinite cardinals — an 
important but very distinct part of Cantoris contributions to the theory 
of infinity. We shall find it possible to give a general definition of 
continuity, in which no appeal is made to the mass of unanalyzed 
prejudice which Kantians call 44 intuition”; and in Part VI we shall 
find that no other continuity is involved in space and time. And we 
shall find that, by a strict adherence to the doctrine of limits, it is 
possible to dispense entirely with the infinitesimal, even in the definition 
of continuity and the foundations of the Calculus. 

260. It is a singular fact that, in proportion as the infinitesimal 
has been extruded from mathematics, the infinite has been allowed 
a freer development. From Cantoris work it appears that there are 
two respects in which infinite numbers differ from those that are finite. 
The first, which applies to both cardinals and ordinals, is, that they do 
not obey mathematical induction — or rather, they do not form part of 
a series of numbers beginning with 1 or 0, proceeding in order of 
magnitude, containing all numbers intermediate in magnitude between 
any two of its terms, and obeying mathematical induction. The 
second, which applies only to cardinals, is, that a whole of an infinite 
number of terms always contains a part consisting of the same 
number of terms. The first respect constitutes the true definition 
of an infinite series, or rather of what we may call an infinite 
term in a series : it gives the essence of the ordinal infinite. The 
second gives the definition of an infinite collection, and will doubtless 
be pronounced by the philosopher to be plainly self-contradictory. But 
if he will condescend to attempt to exhibit the contradiction, he will 
find that it can only be proved by admitting mathematical induction, 
so that he has merely established a connection with the ordinal infinite. 
Thus he will be compelled to maintain that the denial of mathematical 
induction is self-contradictory ; and as he has probably reflected little, 
if at all, on this subject, he will do well to examine the matter before 
pronouncing judgment. And when it is admitted that mathematical 
induction may be denied without contradiction, the supposed antinomies 
of infinity and continuity one and all disappear. This I shall endeavour 
to prove in detail in the following chapters. 

261. Throughout this Part we shall often have occasion for a 
notion which has hitherto been scarcely mentioned, namely the correla- 
tion of series. In the preceding Part we examined the nature of 
isolated series, but we scarcely considered the relations between different 
series. These relations, however, are of an importance which philo- 
sophers have wholly overlooked, and mathematicians have but lately 



261 


249 - 261 ] The Correlation of Series 

realized. It has long been known how much could be done in Geometry 
by means of homography, which is an example of correlation; and it 
has been shown by Cantor how important it is to know whether a series 
is denumerable, and how similar two series capable of correlation are. 
But it is not usually pointed out that a dependent variable and its 
independent variable are, in most mathematical cases, merely correlated 
series, nor has the general idea of correlation been adequately dealt 
with. In the present work only the philosophical aspects of the subject 
are relevant. 

Two series s' are said to be correlated when there is a one-one 
relation R coupling every term of .9 with a term of s\ and vice versa , and 
when, if x> y be terms of .9, and x precedes y , then their correlates x\ y in 
s are such that x precedes y . Two classes or collections are correlated 
whenever there is a one-one relation between the terms of the one and 
the terms of the other, none being left over. Thus two series may be 
correlated as classes without being correlated as series ; for correlation 
as classes involves onlv the same cardinal number, whereas correlation 
as series involves also the same ordinal type — a distinction whose 
importance will be explained hereafter. In. order to distinguish these 
cases, it will be well to speak of the correlation of classes as correlation 
simply, and of the correlation of series as ordinal correlation. Thus 
whenever correlation is mentioned without an adjective, it is to be 
understood as being not necessarily ordinal. Correlated classes will be 
called similar ; correlated series will be called ordinally similar ; and 
their generating relations will be said to have the relation of 
likeness. 

Correlation is a method by which, when one series is given, others 
may be generated. If there be any series whose generating relation 
is P, and any one-one relation which holds between any term x of the 
series and some term which we may call X& then the class of terms 
Xji will form a series of the same type as the class of terms x. For 
suppose y to be any other term of our original series, and assume xPy. 
Then we have XrRx , xPy, and yRj/R . Hence x ^RPRy r. Now it may 
be shown* that, if P be transitive and asymmetrical, so is RPR ; hence 
the correlates of terms of tne P-series form a series whose generating 
relation is RPR. Between these two series there is ordinal correlation, 
and the series have complete ordinal similarity. In this way a new 
series, similar to the original one, is generated by any one-one relation 
whose field includes the original series. It can also be shown that, 
conversely, if P, P be the generating relations of two similar series, 
there is a one-one relation P, whose domain is the field of P, which 
is such that P = RPR . 

* See my article in KdM, Vol. vm, No. 2. 



262 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxn 

252. We can now understand a distinction of great importance, 
namely that between self-sufficient or independent series, and series by 
correlation. In the case just explained there is perfect mathematical 
symmetry between the original series and the series by correlation ; for, if 
we denote by Q the relation RPR, we shall find P = RQR. Thus we may 
take either the Q-series or the P-series as the original, and regard the 
other as derivative. But if it should happen that R , instead of being 
one-one, is many-one, the terms of the field of Q , which we will call q , 
will have an order in which there is repetition, the same term occurring 
in different positions corresponding to its different correlates in the field 
of P, which we will call p. This is the ordinary case of mathematical 
functions which are not linear. It is owing to preoccupation with such 
series that most mathematicians fail to realize the impossibility, in an 
independent series, of any recurrence of the same term. In every 
sentence of print, for example, the letters acquire an order by correlation 
with the points of space, and the same letter will be repeated in different 
positions. Here the series of letters is essentially derivative, for we 
cannot order the points of space by relation to the letters : this would 
give us several points in the same position, instead of one letter in several 
positions. In fact, if P be a serial relation, and R be a many-one relation 
whose domain is the field of P , and Q = RPR , then Q has all the character- 
istics of a serial relation except that of implying diversity ; but RQR is 
not equivalent to P, and thus there is a lack of symmetry. It is for 
this reason that inverse functions in mathematics, such as sin -1 a?, are 
genuinely distinct from direct functions, and require some device or 
convention before they become unambiguous. Series obtained from 
a many -one correlation as q was obtained above will be called series 
by correlation. They are not genuine series, and it is highly important 
to eliminate them from discussions of fundamental points. 

253. The notion of likeness corresponds, among relations, to similarity 
among classes. It is defined as follows : Tw o relations P, Q are like 
when there is a one-one relation S such that the domain of S is the field 
of Py and Q = SPS. This notion is not confined to serial relations, but 
may be extended to all relations. We may define the relation-nnmbiT 
of a relation P as the class of all relations that are like P; and we can 
proceed to a very general subject which may be called relation -arithmetic. 
Concerning relation-numbers we can prove those of the formal laws of 
addition and multiplication that hold for transfinite ordinals, and thus 
obtain an extension of a part of ordinal arithmetic to relations in 
general. By means of likeness we can define a finite relation as one 
which is not like any proper part of itself — a proper part of a relation 
being a relation which implies it but is not equivalent to it. In this 
way we can completely emancipate ourselves from cardinal arithmetic. 
Moreover the properties of likeness are in themselves interesting and 



263 


252 - 254 ] The Correlation of Series 

important. One curious property is that, if S be one-one and have the 
field of P for its domain, the above equation Q = SPS is equivalent to 
SQ = PS or to QS=SP *. 

254 . Since the correlation of series constitutes most of the mathe- 
matical examples of functions, and since function is a notion which is 
not often clearly explained, it will be well at this point to say something 
concerning the nature of this notion. In its most general form, function- 
ality does not differ from relation. For the present purpose it will be 
well to recall two technical terms, which were defined in Part I. If x 
has a certain relation to ?y, I shall call x the referent , and y the relatum , 
with regard to the relation in question. If now x be defined as belonging 
to some class contained in the domain of the relation, then the relation 
defines y as a function of x. That is to say, an independent variable 
is constituted by a collection of terms, each of which can be referent 
in regard to a certain relation. Then each of these terms has one or 
more relata, and any one of these is a certain function of its referent, 
the function being defined by the relation. Thus father defines a 
function, provided the independent variable be a class contained in that 
of male animals who have or will have propagated their kind ; and 
if A be the father of H , B is said to be a function of A. What is 
essential is an independent variable, i.e. any term of some class, and 
a relation whose extension includes the variable. Then the referent 
is the independent variable, and its function is any one of the cor- 
responding relata. 

But this most general idea of a function is of little use in mathematics. 
There are two principal ways of particularizing the function : first, we 
may confine the relations to be considered to such as are one-one or 
many-one, i.e. such as give to every referent a unique relatfilft ; secondly, 
we may confine the independent variable to series. The second par- 
ticularization is very important, and is specially relevant to our present 
topics. But as it almost wholly excludes functions from Symbolic 
Logic, where series have little importance, we may as well postpone it for 
a moment while we consider the first particularization alone. 

The idea of function is so important, and has been so often con- 
sidered with exclusive reference to numbers, that it is well to fill our 
minds with instances of non-nuinerical functions. Thus a very important 
class of functions are propositions containing a variable f. Let there be 
some proposition in which the phrase “ any a” occurs, where a is some 
class. Then in place of “any a” we may put a?, where x is an undefined 
member of the class a — in other words, any a. The proposition then 
becomes a function of x , which is unique when x is given. This pro- 
position will, in general, be true for some values of x and false for others. 

* On this subject see my article in KdM, Vol. vm, especially Nos. 2, 6. 

t These are what in Part I we called propositional functions. 



264 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxii 

The values for which the function is true form what might be called, 
by analogy with Analytic Geometry, a logical* curve. This general 
view may, in fact, be made to include that of Analytic Geometry. The 
equation of a plane curve, for example, is a propositional function which 
is a function of two variables x and y, and the curve is the assemblage of 
points which give to the variables values that make the proposition true. 
A proposition containing the word any is the assertion that a certain 
propositional function is true for all values of the variable for which it is 
significant. Thus “ any man is mortal ” asserts that “ x is a man implies 
x is a mortal ” is true for all values of x for which it is significant, which 
may be called the admissible values. Propositional functions, such as 
M x is a number,” have the peculiarity that they look like propositions, 
and seem capable of implying other propositional functions, while yet 
they are neither true nor false. The fact is, they are propositions for all 
admissible values of the variable, but not while the variable remains a 
variable, whose value is not assigned ; and although they may, for every 
admissible value of the variable, imply the corresponding value of some 
other propositional function, yet while the variable remains as a variable 
they can imply nothing. The question concerning the nature of a 
propositional function as opposed to a proposition, and generally of a 
function as opposed to its values, is a difficult one, which can only be 
solved by an analysis of the nature of the variable. It is important, 
however, to observe that propositional functions, as was shown in 
Chapter vu, are more fundamental than other functions, or even than 
relations. For most purposes, it is convenient to identify the function 
and the relation, i.e. 9 if y=f{x) is equivalent to xRy y where R is a 
relation, it is convenient to speak of R as the function, and this will be 
done in what follows; the reader, however, should remember that the 
idea of functionality is more fundamental than that of relation. But 
the investigation of these points has been already undertaken in Fart I, 
and enough has been said to illustrate how a proposition may be a 
function of a variable. 

Other instances of non-numerical functions are afforded by diction- 
aries. The French for a word is a function of the Fiiiglish, and vice 
versa , and both are functions of the term which both designate. The 
press-mark of a book in a library catalogue is a function of the book, 
and a number in a cipher is a function of the word for which it stands. 
In all these cases there is a relation by which the relatum becomes unique 
(or, in the case of languages, generally unique) when the referent 
is given; but the terms of the independent variable do not form a 
series, except in the purely external order resulting from the alphabet. 

256. Let us now introduce the second specification, that our 
independent variable is to be a series. The dependent variable is then 
a series by correlation, and may be also an independent series. For 
example, the positions occupied by a material point at a series of instants 



265 


254, 255] The Correlation of Series 

form a series by correlation with the instants, of which they are a 
function ; but in virtue of tbe continuity of motion, they also form, 
as a rule, a geometrical series independent of all reference to time. 
Thus motion affords an admirable example of the correlation of series. 
At the same time it illustrates a most important mark bv which, when it 
is present, we can tell that a series is not independent. When the 
time is known, the position of a material particle is uniquely determined; 
but when the position is given, there may Ik* several moments, or even an 
infinite number of them, corresponding to the given position. (There 
will be an infinite number of such moments if, as is commonly said, the 
particle has ln*en at rest in the position in question. Rest is a loose and 
ambiguous expression, but I defer its consideration to Part VII. ) Thus 
the relation of the time to the position is not strictly one-one, but may 
be many-one. This was a case considered in our general account of 
correlation, as giving rise to dependent series. We inferred, it will 
Ik* remembered, that two correlated independent series are mathemati- 
cally on the same level, because if P, Q be their generating relations, and 
R the correlating relation, we infer P = RQR from Q = RPR . lfut 
this inference fails as soon as R is not strictly one-one, since then we no 
longer have RR contained in V, where V means identity. For example, 
my father's son need not be myself, though my son’s father must be. 
This illustrates the fact that, if R be a many-one relation, RR and RR 
must Ik* carefully distinguished : the latter is contained in identity, but 
not the former. Hence whenever R is a many-one relation, it may be 
used to form a series by correlation, but the series so formed cannot be 
independent. This is an important point, which is absolutely fatal to 
the relational theory of time*. For the present let us return to the 
case of motion. When a particle describes a closed curve, or one 
which has double points, or when the particle is sometimes at rest 
during a finite time, then the series of points which it occupies 
is essentially a series by correlation, not an independent series. But, 
as I remarked above, a curve is not only obtainable by motion, 
but is also a purely geometrical figure, which can be defined without 
reference to any supposed material point. When, however, a curve is 
so defined, it must not contain points of rest: the path of a material 
point which sometimes moves, but is sometimes at rest for a finite time, 
is different when considered kinematicallv and when considered geonietri- 
cally; for geometrically the point in which there is rest is one, whereas 
kinematically it corresponds to many terms in the scries. 

The above discussion of motion illustrates, in a non-numerical 
instance, a case which normally occurs among the functions of pure 
mathematics. These functions (when they are functions of a real 

* See my article “Is position in Time and Space absolute or relative?” Mind , 
July 1901. 



266 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxn 

variable) usually fulfil the following conditions : Both the independent 
and the dependent variable are classes of numbers, and the defining 
relation of the function is many -one*. This case covers rational 
functions, circular and elliptic functions of a real variable, and the 
great majority of the direct functions of pure mathematics. In all such 
cases, the independent variable is a series of numbers, which may be 
restricted in any way we please — to positive numbers, rationals, integers, 
primes, or any other class. The dependent variable consists also of 
numbers, but the order of these numbers is determined by their relation 
to the corresponding term of the independent variable, not by that of 
the numbers forming the dependent variable themselves. In a large 
class of functions the two orders happen to coincide ; in others, again, 
where there are maxima and minima at finite intervals, the two orders 
coincide throughout a finite stretch, then they become exactly opposite 
throughout another finite stretch, and so on. If x be the independent 
variable, y the dependent variable, and the constitutive relation be 
many-one, the same number y will, in general, be a function of, i.e. 
correspond to, several numbers x. Hence the //-series is essentially by 
correlation, and cannot be taken as an independent series. If, then, we 
wish to consider the inverse function, which is defined by the converse 
relation, we need certain devices if we are still to have correlation of 
series. One of these, which seems the most important, consists in 
dividing the values of x corresponding to the same value of y into 
classes, so that (what may happen) we can distinguish (say) n different 
x\ each of which has a distinct one-one relation to y, and is therefore 
simply reversible. This is the usual course, for example, in distinguish- 
ing positive and negative square roots. It is possible wherever the 
generating relation of our original function is formally capable of 
exhibition as a disjunction of one-one relations. It is plain that the 
disjunctive relation formed of n one-one relations, each of which contains 
in its domain a certain class it , will, throughout the class w, be an 
M-one relation. Thus it may happen that the independent variable 
can be divided into n classes, within each of which the defining relation 
is one-one, i.e. within each of which there is only one x having the 
defining relation to a given y. In such cases, which are usual in pure 
mathematics, our many-one relation can be made into a disjunction of 
one-one relations, each of which separately is reversible. In the case of 
complex functions, this is, mutatis mutandis ,. the method of Riemann 
surfaces. But it must be clearly remembered that, where our function 
is not naturally one-one, the y which appears as dependent variable is 
ordinally distinct from the y which appears as independent variable in 
the inverse function. 

The above remarks, which will receive illustration as we proceed, 

* 1 omit for the present complex variables, which, by introducing dimensions, 
lead to complications of an entirely distinct kind. 



267 


266, 266] The Correlation oj Series 

have shown, I hope, how intimately the correlation of series is associated 
with the usual mathematical employment of functions. Many other 
cases of the importance of correlation will meet us as we proceed. It 
may be observed that every denumerable class is related by a one- valued 
function to the finite integers, and vice versa. As ordered by correlation 
with the integers, such a class becomes a series having the type of order 
which Cantor calls o>. The fundamental importance of correlation to 
Cantor’s theory of transfinite numbers will appear when we come to the 
definition of the transfinite ordinals. 

266. In connection with functions, it seems desirable to say some- 
thing concerning the necessity of a formula for definition. A function 
was originally, after it had ceased to be merely a power, essentially 
something that could be expressed by a formula. It was usual to start 
with some expression containing a variable x, and to say nothing to 
begin with as to what x was to be, beyond a usually tacit assumption 
that x was some kind of number. Any further limitations upon x were 
derived, if at all, from the formula itself ; and it was mainly the desire 
to remove such limitations which led to the various generalizations of 
number. This algebraical generalization* has now been superseded by 
a more ordinal treatment, in which all classes of numbers are defined by 
means of the integers, and formulae are not relevant to the process. 
Nevertheless, for the use of functions, where both the independent and 
the dependent variables are infinite classes, the formula has a certain 
importance. Let us see what is its definition. 

A formula, in its most general sense, is a proposition, or more 
properly a propositional function, containing one or more variables, 
a variable being any term of some defined class, or even any term 
without restriction. The kind of formula which is relevant in connection 
with functions of a single variable is a formula containing two variables. 
If both variables are defined, say one as belonging to the class w, 
the other as belonging to the class r, the formula is true or false. It is 
true if every u has to every v the relation expressed by the formula ; 
otherwise it is false. But if one of the variables, say x y be defined as 
belonging to the class w, while the other, t/, is only defined by the 
formula, then the formula may be regarded as defining y as a function 
of x. Let us call the formula P^ r If in the class u there are terms x 
such that there is no term y which makes Pjy a true proposition, then 
the formula, as regards those terms, is impossible. We must therefore 
assume that u is a class every term of which will, for a suitable value 
of z/, make the proposition P xy true. If, then, for every term x of w, 
there are some entities y, which make Pry true, and others which do not 
do so, then P^ correlates to every x a certain class of terms y. In 
this way y is defined as a function of x . 

* Of which an excellent account will be found in Couturat, De l Infini Mathtma- 
tique , Paris, 1896, Part 1, Book II. 



268 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxii 

But the usual meaning of formula in mathematics involves another 
element, which may also be expressed by the word law. It is difficult to 
say precisely what this element is, but it seems to consist in a certain 
degree of intensional simplicity of the proposition P xy . In the case of 
two languages, for example, it would be said that there is no formula 
connecting them, except in such cases as Grimm’s law. Apart from the 
dictionary, the relation which correlates words in different languages is 
sameness of meaning ; but this gives no method by which, given a word 
in one language, we can infer the corresponding word in the other. 
What is absent is the possibility of calculation. A formula, on the 
other hand (say y — &r), gives the means, when we know x , of dis- 
covering y. In the case of languages, only enumeration of all pairs 
will define the dependent variable. In the case of an algebraical 
formula, the independent variable and the relation enable us to know 
all about the dependent variable. If functions are to extend to infinite 
classes, this state of things is essential, for enumeration has become 
impossible. It is therefore essential to the correlation of infinite classes, 
and to the study of functions of infinite classes, that the formula P ^ 
should be one in which, given x , the class of terms y satisfying the 
formula should be one which we can discover. I am unable to give 
a logical account of this condition, and I suspect it of being purely 
psychological. Its practical importance is great, but its theoretical 
importance seems highly doubtful. 

There is, however, a logical condition connected with the above, 
though perhaps not quite identical with it. Given any two terms, 
there is some relation which holds between those two terms and 
no others. It follows that, given any two classes of terms ?/, v y 
there is a disjunctive relation which any one term of u has to at 
least one term of v y and which no term not belonging to u has 
to any term. By this method, when two classes are both finite, 
we can carry out a correlation (which may be one-one, many-one, or 
one-many) which correlates terms of these classes and no others. In 
this way any set of terms is theoretically a function of any other ; and 
it is only thus, for example, that diplomatic ciphers are made up. But 
if the number of terms in the class constituting the independent variable 
be infinite, we cannot in this way practically define a function, unless 
the disjunctive relation consists of relations developed one from the 
other by a law, in which case the formula is merely transferred to the 
relation. This amounts to saying that the defining relation of a function 
must not be infinitely complex, or, if it be so, must be itself a function 
defined by some relation of finite complexity. This condition, though 
it is itself logical, has again, I think, only psychological necessity, in 
virtue of which we can only master the infinite by means of a law of 
order. The discussion of this point, however, would involve a discussion 
of the relation of infinity to order — a question which will be resumed 



269 


250, 257] The Correlation of Series 

later, but which we are not yet in a position to treat intelligently. In 
any case, we may say that a formula containing two variables and 
defining a function must, if it is to be practically useful, give a relation 
between the two variables by which, when one of them is given, all the 
corresponding values of the other can be found; and this seems to 
constitute the mathematical essence of all formulae. 

257. There remains an entirely distinct logical notion of much 
importance in connection with limits, namely the notion of a com- 
plete series. If R be the defining relation of a series, the series 
is complete when there is a term x belonging to the series, such 
that every other term which has to x either the relation R or the 
relation R belongs to the series. It is connected (as was explained in 
Part IV) when no other terms belong to the series. Thus a complete 
series consists of those terms, and only those terms, which have the 
generating relation or its converse to some one term, together with that 
one term. Since the generating relation is transitive, a series which 
fulfils this condition for one of its terms fulfils it for all of them. 
A series which is connected but not complete will be called incomplete 
or partial. Instances of complete series are the cardinal integers, the 
positive and negative integers and zero, the rational numbers, the 
moments of time, or the points on a straight line. Any selection from 
such a series is incomplete with respect to the generating relations of the 
above complete series. Thus the positive numbers are an incomplete 
series, and so are the rationals between 0 and 1. When a series is 
complete, no term can come before or after any term of the series 
without belonging to the series; when the series is incomplete, this is 
no longer the case. A series may be complete with respect to one 
generating relation, but not with respect to another. Thus the finite 
integers are a complete series when the series is defined by powers of 
the relation of consecutiveness, as in the discussion of progressions in 
Part IV ; but when they are ordered by correlation with whole and part, 
they form only part of the series of finite and transfinite integers, as we 
shall see hereafter. A complete series may be regarded as the extension 
of a term with respect to a given relation, together with this term itself ; 
and owing to this fact it has, as we shall find, some important differences 
from ordinally similar incomplete series. But it can be shown, by the 
Logic of Relations, that any incomplete series can be rendered complete 
by a change in the generating relation, and vice versa . The distinction 
between complete and incomplete series is, therefore, essentially relative 
to a given generating relation. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 


REAL NUMBERS. 

258 . The philosopher may be surprised, after all that has already 
been said concerning numbers, to find that he is only now to learn about 
real numbers ; and his surprise will be turned to horror when he learns 
that real is opposed to rational. But he will be relieved to learn that 
real numbers are really not numbers at all, but something quite different. 

The series of real numbers, as ordinarily defined, consists of the 
whole assemblage of rational and irrational numbers, the irrationals 
being defined as the limits of such series of rationals as have neither 
a rational nor an infinite limit. This definition, however, introduces 
grave difficulties, which will be considered in the next chapter. For iny 
part I see no reason whatever to suppose that there are any irrational 
numbers in the above sense ; and if there are any, it seems certain that 
they cannot be greater or less than rational numbers. When mathema- 
ticians have effected a generalization of number they are apt to be unduly 
modest about it — they think that the difference between the generalized 
and the original notions is less than it really is. We have already seen that 
the finite cardinals are not to be identified with the positive integers, nor 
yet with the ratios of the natural numbers to 1, both of which express 
relations, which the natural numbers do not. In like manner there is a 
real number associated with every rational number, but distinct from it. 
A real number, so I shall contend, is nothing but a certain class of 
rational numbers. Thus the class of rationals less than £ is a real 
number, associated with, but obviously not identical with, the rational 
number J . This theory is not, so far as I know, explicitly advocated by 
any other author, though Peano suggests it, and Cantor comes very near 
to it*. My grounds in favour of this opinion are, first, that such classes 
of rationals have all the mathematical properties commonly assigned 
to real numbers, secondly, that the opposite theory presents logical 
difficulties which appear to me insuperable. The second point will be 
discussed in the next chapter; for the present I shall merely expound 

* Cf. Cantor, Math. Annalen , Vol. xlvi, § 10; Peano, Rivuita di Matematica , 
Vol. vi, pp. 126-140, esp. p. 133. 



Real Numbers 


271 


258, 259] 

my own view, and endeavour to show that real numbers, so understood, 
have all the requisite characteristics. It will be observed that the 
following theory is independent of the doctrine of limits, which will only 
be introduced in the next chapter. 

259. The rational numbers in order of magnitude form a series in 
which there is a term between any two. Such series, which in Part III 
we provisionally called continuous, must now receive another name, since 
we shall have to reserve the word continuous for the sense which Cantor 
has given to it. I propose to call such scries compact * * * § . The rational 
numbers, then, form a compact series. It is to be observed that, in a 
compact series, there are an infinite number of terms between any two, 
there are no consecutive terms, and the stretch between any two terms 
(whether these be included or not) is again a compact series. If now we 
consider any one rational number f, say r, we can define, by relation to r, 
four infinite classes of rationals : (1) those less than r, (2) those not 
greater than r, (3) those greater than r, (4) those not less than r. 
(2) and (4) differ from (1) and (3) respectively solely by the fact that 
the former contain r, while the latter do not. But this fact leads to 
curious differences of properties. (2) has a last term, while (1) has 
none; (1) is identical with the class of rational numbers less than a 
variable term of (1), while (2) does not have this characteristic. Similar 
remarks apply to (3) and (4), but these two classes have less importance 
in the present case than in (1) and (2). Classes of rationals having 
the properties of (1) are called segments . A segment of rationals may 
be defined as a class of rationals which is not null, nor yet coextensive 
with the rationals themselves (i.e. which contains some but not all 
rationals), and which is identical with the class of rationals less than a 
(variable) term of itself, i.e. with the class of rationals x such that there 
is a rational y of the said class such that x is less than y J. Now we shall 
find that segments are obtained by the above method, not only from 
single rationals, but also from finite or infinite classes of rationals, with 
the proviso, for infinite classes, that there must be some rational greater 
than any member of the class. This is very simply done as follows. 

Let u be any finite or infinite class of rationals. Then four classes 
may be defined by relation to w§, namely (1) those less than every u 9 
(2) those less than a variable u y (3) those greater than every w, (4) those 
greater than a variable w, i.e. those such that for each a term of u can be 
found which is smaller than it. If u be a finite class, it must have a maximum 
and a minimum term ; in this case the former alone is relevant to (2) 
and (3), the latter alone to (1) and (4). Thus this case is reduced to 
the former, in which we had only a single rational. I shall therefore 

* Such series are called by Cantor uberall dickt . 

f 1 shall for simplicity confine myself entirely to rationals without sign. The 
extension to such as are positive or negative presents no difficulty whatever. 

X See Fortnutaire de Matk&mutiquett , Vol. ii, Part iii, § 61 (Turin, 1899). 

§ Eight classes may be defined, but four are all that we need. 



272 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxiii 

assume in future that u is an infinite class, and further, to prevent 
reduction to our former case, I shall assume, in considering (2) and (3), 
that u has no maximum, that is, that everv term of u is less than some 
other term of u ; and in considering (1) and (4), I shall assume that u 
has no minimum. For the present I confine myself to (2) and (3), and 
I assume, in addition to the absence of a maximum, the existence of 
rationals greater than any u> that is, the existence of the class (3). 
Under these circumstances, the class (2) will be a segment. For (2) 
consists of all rationals which are less than a variable u ; hence, in the 
first place, since u has no maximum, (2) contains the whole of u. In the 
second place, since every term of (2) is less than some u 9 which in turn 
belongs to (2), every term of (2) is less than some other term of (2); 
and every term less than some term of (2) is a fortiori less than some w, 
and is therefore a term of (2). Hence (2) is identical with the class of 
terms less than some term of (2), and is therefore a segment. 

Thus we have the following conclusion : If u be a single rational, or 
a class of rationals all of which are less than some fixed rational, then 
the rationals less than 7 /., if u be a single term, or less than a variable 
term of u , if it be a class of terms, always form a segment of rationals. 
My contention is, that a segment of rationals is a real number. 

260. So far, the method employed has been one which may be 
employed in any compact series. In what follows, some of the theorems 
will depend upon the fact that the rationals are a denumerable series. 
I leave for the present the disentangling of the theorems dependent 
upon this fact, and proceed to the properties of segments of rationals. 

Some segments, as we have seen, consist of the rationals less than 
some given rational. Some, it will be found, though not so defined, are 
nevertheless capable of being so defined. For example, the rationals 
less than a variable term of the series ‘9, *99, *999, etc., are the same as 
the rationals less than 1. But other segments, which correspond to 
what are usually called irrationals, are incapable of any such definition. 
How this fact has led to irrationals we shall see in the next chapter. 
For the present I merely wish to point out the well-known fact that 
segments are not capable of a one-one correlation with rationals. There 
are classes of rationals defined as being composed of all terms less than 
a variable term of an infinite class of rationals, which are not definable 
as all the rationals less than some one definite rational*. Moreover 
there are more segments than rationals, and hence the series of segments 
has continuity of a higher order than the rationals. Segments form a 
series in virtue of the relation of whole and part, or of logical inclusion 
(excluding identity). Any two segments are such that one of them 
is wholly contained in the other, and in virtue of this fact they form 
a series. It can be easily shown that they form a compact series. 
What is more remarkable is this : if we apply the above process to the 


* (’f. Part I, chap, v, p. (>0. 



Real Numbers 


273 


259, 260] 

series of segments, forming segments of segments by reference to 
classes of segments, we find that every segment of segments can be 
defined as all segments contained in a certain definite segment Thus 
the segment of segments defined by a class of segments is always 
identical with the segment of segments defined by some one segment. 
Also every segment defines a segment of segments which can be defined 
by an infinite class of segments. These two properties render the 
series of segments perfect , in Cantor's language ; but the explanation of 
this term must be left till we come to the doctrine of limits. 

We might have defined our segments as all rationals greater than 
some term of a class a of rationals. If we had done this, and inserted 
the conditions that u was to have no minimum, and that there were to 
be rationals less than every w, we should have obtained what may be 
called upper segments, as distinguished from the former kind, which 
may be called lower segments. W e should then have found that, corre- 
sponding to every upper segment, there is a lower segment which contains 
all rationals not contained in the upper segment, with the occasional 
exception of a single rational. There will be one rational not belonging 
to either the upper or the lower segment, when the upper segment 
can be defined as all rationals greater than a single rational. In this 
case, the corresponding lower segment will consist of all rationals less 
than this single rational, which will itself belong to neither segment. 
Since there is a rational between any two, the class of rationals not 
greater than a given rational cannot ever be identical with the class of 
rationals less than some other; and a class of rationals having a 
maximum can never be a segment. Hence it is impossible, in the case 
in question, to find a lower segment containing all the rationals not 
belonging to the given upper segment. But when the upper segment 
cannot be defined by a single rational, it will always be possible 
to find a lower segment containing all rationals not belonging to the 
upper segment. 

Zero and infinity may be introduced as limiting cases of segments, 
but in the case of zero the segment must be of the kind which we 
called (1) above, not of the kind (2) hitherto discussed. It is easy to 
construct a class of rationals such that some term of the class will be less 
than any given rational. In this case, the class (1) will contain no terms, 
and will be the null-class. This is the real number zero, which, however, 
is not a segment, since a segment was defined as a class which is not null. 
In order to introduce zero as a class of th^ kind which we called (2), we 
should have to start with a null class ,4f rationals. No rational is less 
than a term of a null class of rational&rond thus the class (2), in such a 
case, is null. Similarly the real n^nber infinity may be introduced. 
This is identical with the whole dass of rationals. If we have any 
class u of rationals such that no/rational is greater than all u\ then 
every rational is contained in the class of rationals less than some 



274 


Infinity arid Continuity [chap, xxxiii 

u. Or again, if we have a class of rationals of which a term is less than 
any assigned rational, the resulting class (4) (of terms greater than 
some u) will contain every rational, and will thus be the real number 
infinity. Thus both zero and infinity may be introduced as extreme 
terms among the real numbers, but neither is a segment according to the 
definition. 

261 . A given segment may be defined by many different classes of 
rationals. Two such classes u and v may be regarded as having the 
segment as a common property. Two infinite classes u and v will define 
the same lower segment if, given any u, there is a v greater than it, ahd 
given any v , there is a u greater than it. If each class has no maximum, 
this is also a necessary condition. The classes u and v are then what 
Cantor calls coherent ( zusammengehorig ). It can be shown, without 
considering segments, that the relation of being coherent is symmetrical 
and transitive*, whence we should infer, by the principle of abstraction, 
that both have to some third term a common relation which neither has 
to any other term. This third term, as we see from the preceding 
discussion, may be taken to be the segment which both define. We 
may extend the word coherent to two classes u and v , of which one 
defines an upper segment, the other a lower segment, which between 
them include all rationals with at most one exception. Similar remarks, 
mutatis mutandis, will still apply in this case. 

We have now seen that the usual properties of real numbers belong 
to segments of rationals. There is therefore no mathematical reason for 
distinguishing such segments from real numbers. It remains to set 
forth, first the nature of a limit, then the current theories of irrationals, 
and then the objections which make the above theory seem preferable. 

Note. The above theory is virtually contained in Professor Peano’s 
article already referred to (“ Sui Numeri Irrazionali,” Rivista di Mate - 
viatica, vi, pp. 126—140), and it was from this article, as well as from the 
Formulaire de Mathematiques , that I was led to adopt the theory. In 
this article, separate definitions of real numbers (§ 2, No. 5) and of 
segments (§8, *0) are given, which makes it seem as though the two 
were distinguished. But after the definition of segments, we find the 
remark (p. 133) : u Segments so defined differ only in nomenclature from 
real numbers. 1 ’ Professor Peano proceeds first to give purely technical 
reasons for distinguishing the two by the notation, namely that the 
addition, subtraction, etc. o? real numbers is to be differently conducted 
from analogous operations vhich are to be performed on segments. 
Hence it would appear that ti \ whole of the view I have advocated is 
contained in this article. At £he same time, there is some lack of 
clearness, since it appears from tR^efinition of real numbers that they 
are regarded as the limits of classy of rationals, whereas a segment is 

* Cf. ( ’an tor, Math. Atma/en, xlvi, and h,vixta di Mutematwa, v, pp. 158, 159. 



Real Numbers 


275 


260, 261] 

in no sense a limit of a class of rationals, Also it is nowhere suggested— 
indeed, from the definition of real numbers the opposite is to be 
inferred — that no real number can be a rational, and no rational can be 
a real number. And this appears where he points out (p. 134) that 1 
differs from the class of proper fractions (which is no longer the case as 
regards the real number 1, when this is distinguished both from the 
integer 1 and from the rational number 1 : 1), or that we say 1 is less 
than V2 (in which case, I should say, 1 must be interpreted as the class 
of proper fractions, and the assertion must be taken to mean : the 
proper fractions are some, but not all, of the rationals whose square 
is less than 2). And again he says (if).): “The real number, although 
determined by, and determining, a segment it, is commonly regarded as 
the extremity, or end, or upper limit, of the segment”; whereas there is 
no reason to suppose that segments not having a rational limit have a 
limit at all. Thus although he confesses ( ib .) that a complete theory 
of irrationals can be constructed by means of segments, he does not 
seem to perceive the reasons (which will be given in the next chapter) 
why this must be done — reasons which, in fact, are rather philosophical 
than mathematical. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 


LIMITS AND IRRATIONAL NUMBERS. 'i 

262. The mathematical treatment of continuity rests wholly upon 
the doctrine of limits. It has been thought by some mathematicians 
and some philosophers that this doctrine had been superseded by the 
Infinitesimal Calculus, and that this has shown true infinitesimals 
to be presupposed in limits*. But modem mathematics has shown, 
conclusively as it seems to me, that such a view is- erroneous. The 
method of limits has more and more emerged as fundamental. In this 
Chapter, I shall first set forth the genera] definition of a limit, and 
then examine its application to the creation of irrationals. 

A compact series we defined as one in which there is a term between 
any two. But in such a series it is always possible to find two classes of 
terms which have no term between them, and it is always possible to 
reduce one of these classes to a single term. For example, if P be the 
generating relation and x any term of the series, then the class of terms 
having to x the relation P is one between which and x there is no termf. 
The class of terms so defined is one of the two segments determined 
by x; the idea of a segment is one which demands only a series in 
general, not necessarily a numerical series. In this case, if the series be 
compact, x is said to be the limit of the class ; when there is such a 
term as #, the segment is said to be terminated, and thus every 
terminated segment in a compact series has its defining term as a limit. 
But this does not constitute a definition of a limit. To obtain the 
general definition of a limit, consider any class u contained in the series 
generated by P . Then the class u will in general, with respect to any 
term x not belonging to it, be divisible into two classes, that whose 
terms have to x the relation P (which I shall call the class of terms pre- 
ceding x\ and that whose terms have to x the relation P (which I shall 
call the class of terms following x). If # be itself a term of w, we 

* This is the view, for instance, of Cohen, Das Princip der Infinitesimal - 
Methods und seine Geschichte, Berlin, 1883; see pp. 1, 2. 

f It is perhaps superfluous to explain that a term is between two classes u } v, when 
it has the relation P to every term of u, and the relation P to every term of v, or 
vice versa. 



277 


262-264] Limits and Irrational Numbers 

consider all the terms of u other than .r, and these are still divisible into 
the above two classes, which we may call ir u x and 7 r tt .r respectively. 
If, now, ir u x be such that, if y be any term preceding x , there is a term 
of i t u x following y, i.e. between x and ?/, then x is a limit of tt u < x. Similarly 
if 7r tl F be such that, if z be any term after x 9 there is a term of tt u x 
between x and £, then x is a limit of tt u x. We now define that x is 
a limit of u if it is a limit of either 7 r u x or tt w t. It is to be observed that 
u may have many limits, and that all the limits together form a new 
class contained in the series generated by P. This is the class (or rather 
this, by the help of certain further assumptions, becomes the class) 
which Cantor designates as the first derivative of the class u . 

263. Before proceeding further, it may be well to make some 
general remarks of an elementary character on the subject of limits. 
In the first place, limits belong usually to classes contained in compact 
series — classes which may, as an extreme case, be identical with the 
compact series in question. In the second place, a limit may or may 
not belong to the class u of which it is a limit, but it always belongs to 
some series in which u is contained, and if it is a term of u> it is still a 
limit of the class consisting of all terms of u except itself. In the 
third place, no class can have a limit unless it contains an infinite 
number of terms. For, to revert to our former division, if u be finite, 
tt u x and tt u x will both be finite. Hence each of them will have a term 
nearest to x 9 and between this term and x no term of u will lie. Hence 
x is not a limit of u ; and since x is any term of the series, 11 will have 
no limits at all. It is common to add a theorem that every infinite 
class, provided its terms are all contained between two specified terms 
of the- series generated by P 9 must have at least one limit ; but this 
theorem, we shall find, demands an interpretation in terms of segments, 
and is not true as it stands. In the fourth place, if u he eo-extensive 
with the whole compact series generated by P 9 then every term of this 
series is a limit of u. There can be no other terms that are limits 
in the same sense, since limits have only been defined in relation to this 
compact series. To obtain other limits, we should have to regard the 
series generated by P as forming part of some other compact series — a 
case which, as we shall see, may arise. In any case, if u be any compact 
series, every term of u is a limit of u ; whether u has also other limits, 
depends upon further circumstances. A limit may be defined generally 
as a term which immediately follows (or precedes) some class of terms 
belonging to an infinite series, without immediately following (or 
preceding, as the case may lie) any one term of the series. In this way, 
we shall find, limits may be defined generally in all infinite series which 
are not progressions — as, for instance, in the series of finite and trans- 
finite integers. 

264. We may now proceed to the various arithmetical theories of 
irrationals, all of which depend upon limits. We shall find that, in the 



278 


Infinity and Continuity [ohap. XXXIY 

exact form in which they have been given by their inventors, they all 
involve an axiom, for which there are no arguments, either of philo- 
sophical necessity or of mathematical convenience; to which there are 
grave logical objections ; and of which the theory of real numbers given 
in the preceding Chapter is wholly independent. 

Arithmetical theories of irrationals could not be treated in Part II, 
since they depend essentially upon the notion of order. It is only by 
means of them that numbers become continuous in the sense now usual 
among mathematicians; and we shall find in Part VI that no othpr 
sense of continuity is required for space and time. It is very important 
to realize the logical reasons for which an arithmetical theory of 
irrationals is imperatively necessary. In the past, the definition of 
irrationals was commonly effected by geometrical considerations. This 
procedure was, however, highly illogical ; for if the application of 
numbers to space is to yield anything but tautologies, the numbers 
applied must be independently defined ; and if none but a geometrical 
definition were possible, there would be, properly speaking, no such 
arithmetical entities as the definition pretended to define. The alge- 
braical definition, in which irrationals were introduced as the roots 
of algebraic equations having no rational roots, was liable to similar 
objections, since it remained to be shown that such equations have 
roots; moreover this method will only yield the so-called algebraic 
numbers, which are an infinitesimal proportion of the real numbers, and 
do not have continuity in Cantors sense, or in the sense required by 
Geometry. And in any case, if it is possible, without any further 
assumption, to pass from Arithmetic to Analysis, from rationals to 
irrationals, it is a logical advance to show how this can be done. 
Thcf generalizations of number — with the exception of the intro- 
duction of i magi navies, which must be independently effected — are all 
necessary consequences of the admission that the natural numbers form 
a progression. In every progression the terms have two kinds of 
relations, the one constituting the general analogue of positive and 
negative integers, the other that of rational numbers. The rational 
numbers form a denumerable compact series ; and segments of a denumer- 
able compact series, as we saw in the preceding Chapter, form a series 
which is continuous in the strictest sense. Thus all follows from the 
assumption of a progression. But in the present Chapter we have to 
examine irrationals as based on limits ; and in this sense, we shall find 
that they do not follow without a new assumption. 

There are several somewhat similar theories of irrational numbers. 
I will begin with that of Dedekind*. 

265. Although rational n umbel's are such that, between any two, 
there is always a third, yet there are many ways of dividing all rational 

* Stetigkeit uttd irrationaie Zahlen, 2nd ed., Brunswick, 1892. 



279 


264 - 266 ] Limits and Irrational Numbers 

numbers into two classes, such that all numbers of one class come after 
all numbers of the other class, and no rational number lies between the 
two classes, while yet the first class has no first term and the second has 
no last term. For example, all rational numbers, without exception, 
may be classified according as their squares are greater or less than 2. 
All the terms of both classes may be arranged in a single series, in which 
there exists a definite section, before which comes one of the classes, 
and after which comes the other. Continuity seems to demand that 
some term should correspond to this section. A number which lies 
between the two classes must be a new number, since all the old numbers 
are classified. This new number, which is thus defined by its position in 
a series, is an irrational number. When these numbers are introduced, 
not only is there always a number between any two numbers, but there 
is a number between any two classes of which one comes wholly after the 
other, and the first has no minimum, while the second has no maximum. 
Thus we can extend to numbers the axiom by which Dedekind defines 
the continuity of the straight line (op. cit. p. 11) : — 

“ If all the points of a line can be divided into two classes such that 
every point of one class is to the left of every point of the other class, 
then there exists one and only one point which brings about this 
division of all points into two classes, this section of the line into 
two parts. 1 ’ 

266. This axiom of Dedekind’s is, however, rather loosely worded, and 
requires an emendation suggested by the derivation of irrational numbers. 
If all the points of a line are divided into two classes, no point is left 
over to represent the section. If all be meant to exclude the point repre- 
senting the section, the axiom no longer characterizes continuous series, 
but applies equally to all series, eg. the series of integers. The axiom 
must be held to apply, as regards the division, not to all the points of the 
line, but to all the points forming some compact series, and distributed 
throughout the line, but consisting only of a portion of the points 
of the line. When this emendation is made, the axiom becomes ad- 
missible. If, from among the terms of a series, some can be chosen 
out to form a compact series which is distributed throughout the 
previous series; and if this new series can always be divided in 
Dedekind’s manner into two portions, between which lies no term of 
the new series, but one and only one term of the original series, then 
the original series is continuous in Dedekind’s sense of the word. The 
emendation, however, destroys entirely the self-evidence upon which 
alone Dedekind relies (p. 11) for the proof of his axiom as applied 
to the straight line. 

Another somewhat less complicated emendation may be made, which 
gives, I think, what Dedekind meant to state in his axiom. A series, 
we may say, is continuous in Dedekind’s sense when, and only when, 
if all the terms of the series, without exception, be divided into two 



280 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxiv 

classes, such that the whole of the first class precedes the whole of 
the second, then, however the division be effected, either the first class 
has a last term, or the second class has a first term, but never both. 
This term, which comes at one end of one of the two classes, may then 
be used, in Dedekind’s manner, to define the section. In discrete series, 
such as that of finite integers, there is both a last term of the first 
class and a first term of the second class* ; while in compact series 
such as the rationals, where there is not continuity, it sometimes 
happens (though not for every possible division) that the first class 
has no last term and the last class has no first term. Both these cas^s 
are excluded by the above axiom. But I cannot see any vestige <>f 
self-evidence in such an axiom, either as applied to numbers or as applied 
to space. 

267. leaving aside, for the moment, the general problem of con- 
tinuity, let us return to Dedekind’s definition of irrational numbers. 
The first question that arises is this : What right have we to assume 
the existence of such numbers? What reason have we for supposing 
that there must be a position between two classes of which one is wholly 
to the right of the other, and of which one has no minimum and the 
other no maximum ? This is not true of series in general, since many 
series are discrete. It is not demanded by the nature of order. And, 
as we have seen, continuity in a certain sense is possible without it. 
Why then should we postulate such a number at all ? It must be 
remembered that the algebraical and geometrical problems* which ir- 
rationals are intended to solve, must not here be brought into the 
account. The existence of irrationals has, in the past, been inferred 
from such problems. The equation V- — 2 = 0 must have a root, it was 
argued, because, as x grows from 0 to 2, — 2 increases, and is first 

negative and then positive ; if or changes continuously, so does x — 2 ; 
hence or 2 — 2 must assume the value 0 in passing from negative to positive. 
Or again, it was argued that the diagonal of unit square has evidently a 
precise and definite length or , and that this length is such that o* — 2 = 0. 
But such arguments were powerless to show that x is truly a numl>er. 
They might equally well be regarded as showing the inadequacy of 
numbers to Algebra and Geometry. The present theory is designed 
to prove the arithmetical existence of irrationals. In its design, it is 
preferable to the previous theories ; but the execution seems to fall short 
of the design. 

Let us examine in detail the definition of by Dedekind’s method. 
It is a singular fact that, although a rational number lies between any 
two single rational numbers, two classes of rational numbers may be 
defined so that no rational number lies between them, though all ot 

* If the series contains a proper part which is a progression, it is only true in 
general , not without exception, that the first class must have a last term. 



281 


266, 267] Limits and Irrational Numbers 

one class are higher than all of the other. It is evident that one at 
least of these classes must consist of an infinite number of terms. For 
if not, we could pick out the two of opposite kinds which were nearest 
together, and insert a new number between them. This one would be 
between the two classes, contrary to the hypothesis. But when one of 
the classes is infinite, we may arrange all or some of the terms in a series 
of terms continually approaching the other class, without reaching it, 
and without having a last term. Let us, for the moment, suppose our 
infinite class to be denumerable. We then obtain a denumerable series 
of numbers a n , all belonging to the one class, but continually approaching 
the other class. Let B be a fixed number of the other class. Then 
between a n and B there is always another rational number; but this 
may be chosen to be another of the a s, say a n+] ; and since the series of 
a\s is infinite, we do not necessarily obtain, in this way, any number not 
belonging to the series of as. In the definition of irrationals, the series of 
ba is also infinite. Moreover, if the bs also be denumerable, any rational 
number between a n and b rn9 for suitable values of p and <7, either is a n ^ p 
or or else lies between a n + p and a n+p+1 or between b m + (J and 6 m+g + 1 . 

In fact, a n + p always lies between a n and b in . Bv successive steps, no term 
is obtained which lies between all the bs and all the a\s. Nevertheless, 
both the as and the Us are convergent. For, let the a's increase, while 
the b s diminish. Then b n — a n and b n — a n+l continually diminish, and 
therefore — a n , which is less than either, is less than a continually 
diminishing number. Moreover this number diminishes without limit ; 
for if b n — a n had a limit €, the number a n 4- e/2 would finally lie between 
the two classes. Hence a n+1 — a u becomes finally less than any assigned 
number. Thus the a's and bs are both convergent. Since, moreover, 
their difference may be made less than any assigned number e, they have 
the same limit, if they have any. But this limit cannot lx* a rational 
number, since it lies between all the as and all the bs. Such seems 
to be the argument for the existence of irrationals. For example, if 

x = V2+ 1, a* — &r — 1 =0. 

Thus x = 2 + l/* = 2+g^, anda>-l = l+g^g 1 + i= etc. 

The successive convergents to the continued fraction 1 + -^- — 

ti H- 52 + 52 -f- . . . 

are such that all the odd convergents are less than all the even con- 
vergents, while the odd convergents continually grow, and the even 
ones continually diminish. Moreover the difference between the odd 
and the next even convergent continually diminishes. Thus both 
series, if they have a limit, have the same limit, and this limit is 
defined as \/2. 

But the existence of a limit, in this case, is evidently a sheer as- 
sumption. In the beginning of this Chapter, we saw that the existence 



282 


Infinity and Continuity [ chap , xxxiy 

of a limit demands a larger series of which the limit forms part. To 
create the limit by means of the series whose limit is to be found would 
therefore be a logical error. It is essentia] that the distance from the 
limit should diminish indefinitely. But here, it is only the distance of 
consecutive terms which is known to diminish indefinitely. Moreover 
all the a\ are less than b n . Hence they continually differ less and less 
from b n . But whatever n may be, b n cannot be the limit of the a\ 
for 5 n+ , lies between b n and all the a\s. This cannot prove that a limit 
exists, but only that, if it existed, it would not be any one of the a? s or 
b\ nor yet any other rational number. Thus irrationals are not proved 
to exist, but may be merely convenient fictions to describe the relations 
of the (i s and If s. 

268. The theory of Weierstrass concerning irrationals is somewhat 
similar to that of Dedekind. In Weierstrass’s theory, we have a series 
of terms Oj, a. 2 , . . , a n , . . , such that £ « n , for all values of n, is less 
than some given number. This case is presented, e.g. , by an infinite 
decimal. The fraction 8141 59 . . . , however many terms we take, 
remains less than 3’1 41 6. In this method, as Cantor points out*, the 

limit is not. created by the summation, but must be supposed to exist 

00 

already in order that £ a n may be defined by means of it. This is the 

same state of things as we found in DedekimPs theory : series of rational 
numbers cannot prove the existence of irrational numbers as their limits, 
but can only prove that, if there is a limit, it must be irrational. 

Thus the arithmetical theory of irrationals, in either of the above 
forms, is liable to the following objections. (1) No proof is obtained 
from it of the existence of other than rational numbers, unless we 
accept some axiom of continuity different from that satisfied by 
rational numbers ; and for such an axiom we have as yet seen no 
ground. (2) Granting the existence of irrationals, they are merely 
specified, not defined, by the series of rational numbers whose limits 
they are. Unless they are independently postulated, the series in 
question cannot be known to have a limit ; and a knowledge of the 
irrational number which is a limit is presupposed in the proof that 
it is a limit. Thus, although without any appeal to Geometry, any 
given irrational number can be specified by means of an infinite series 
of rational numbers, yet, from rational numl>ers alone, no proof can 
be obtained that there are irrational numbers at all, and their existence 
must be proved from a new and independent postulate. 

Another objection to the al>ove theory is that it supposes rationals 
and irrationals to form part of one and the same series generated by 
relations of greater and less. This raises the same kind of difficulties as 
we found to result, in Part II, from the notion that integers are greater 

* Mamrii'hfultigh'italehre', p. 2t. I quote VVeierstrass’s theory from the account 
in Stolz, V or le* tinge n iiher nUyemeiue Arithmetik , i. 



283 


267-269] Limits and Irrational Numbers 

or less than rationals, or that sonic rationale are integers. Rationals 
are essentially relations between integers, but irrationals are not such 
relations. Given an infinite series of rationals, there may be two 
integers whose relation is a rational which limits the series, or there 
may be no such pair of integers. The entity postulated as the limit, 
in this latter case, is no longer of the same kind as the terms of 
the series which it is supposed to limit; for each of them is, while 
the limit is not, a relation between two integers. Of such hetero- 
geneous terms, it is difficult to suppose that they can have relations 
of greater and less ; and in fact, the constitutive relation of greater 
and less, from which the series of rationals springs, has to receive 
a new definition for the case of two irrationals, or of a rational and 
an irrational. This definition is, that an irrational is greater than a 
rational, when the irrational limits a series containing terms greater 
than the given rational. But what is really given here is a relation 
of the given rational to a class of rationals, namely the relation of 
belonging to the segment defined by the series whose limit is the given 
irrational. And in the case of two irrationals, one is defined to be 
greater than the other when its defining series contains terms greater 
than any terms of the defining series of the other — a condition which 
amounts to saying that the segment corresponding to the one contains 
as a proper part the segment corresponding to the other. These 
definitions define a relation quite different from the inequality of two 
rationals, namely the logical relation of inclusion. Thus the irrationals 
cannot form part of the series of rationals, but new terms corresponding 
to the rationals must be found Ijefore a single series can be constructed. 
Such terms, as we saw r in the last chapter, are found in segments ; but 
the theories of Dedekind and Weierstrass leave them still to seek. 

269. The theory of Cantor, though not expressed, philosophically 
speaking, with all the requisite clearness, lends itself more easily to the 
interpretation which I advocate, and is specially designed to prove 
the existence of limits. He remarks* that, in his theory, the existence 
of the limit is a strictly demonstrable proposition ; and he strongly 
emphasizes the logical error involved in attempting to deduce the 
existence of the limit from the series whose limit it is (ift., p. 22) t. 
Cantor starts by considering what he calls fundamental series (which 
are the same as what I have called progressions) contained in a larger 
series. Each of these fundamental series is to be wholly ascending or 
wholly descending. Two such series are called coherent ( zusammcnge - 
horig) under the following circumstances ; — 

* Op. rit. f p. 24. 

+ Cantor's theory of irrationals will be found in op. tit. , p. 23, and in Stolz, 
Vorleaungen uher aligemeine Arithnmtik , i, 7. 1 shall follow, to begin with, a later 

account, which seems to me clearer ; this forms § 10 in an article contained in Math. 
Annalen , xlvi, and in Riwtta di Matematica , v. 



284 


Infinity and Continuity [ chap , xxxiv 

(1) If both are ascending, and after any term of either there is 
always a term of the other ; 

(2) If both are descending, and before any term of either there is 
always a term of the other ; 

(8) If one is ascending, the other descending, and the one wholly 
precedes the other, and there is at most one term which is between the 
two fundamental series. 

The relation of being coherent is symmetrical, in virtue of the 
definition ; and Cantor shows that it is transitive. In the article from 
which the above remarks are extracted, Cantor is dealing with mote 
general topics than the definition of irrationals. But the above general 
account of coherent series will help us to understand the theory of 
irrationals. This theory is set forth as follows in the Manmchfaltig - 
keitdehre (p. 28 ff.): — 

A fundamental series of rationals is defined as a denumerable series 
such that, given any number e, there are at most a finite number of 
terms in the series the absolute values of whose differences from sub- 
sequent terms exceed e. That is to say, given any number e, however 
small, any two terms of the series which both come after a certain term 
have a difference which lies between + e and — e. Such series must be 
of one of three kinds : (1 ) Any number e being mentioned, the absolute 
values of the terms, from some term onwards, will all be less than e, 
whatever 6 may be ; (2) from some term onwards, all the terms may be 
greater than a certain positive number p ; (3) from some term onwards, 
all the terms may be less than a certain negative number — p. A real 
number b is to be defined by the fundamental series, and is said in the 
first case to be zero, in the second to be positive, and in the third to 
be negative. To define the addition, etc. , of these new real numbers, 
we observe that, if a V9 be the i'th terms of two fundamental series, 
the series whose vth term is a v - h aj or a v — aj or a v x aj is also a funda- 
mental series; while if the real number defined by the series (a„)* is 
not zero, (aj j a v ) also defines a fundamental series. If b 9 b' be the real 
numbers defined by the series (a„), («„')> the real numbers defined by 
(«„ + a/), (a v — (a v x aj) and («„' / a v ) are defined to be b + b — b\ 
bxb' and b' [ b respectively. Hence we proceed to the definitions of equal, 
greater and less among real n umbers. W e define that b=b' means b - V = 0 ; 
b > b' means that b — b' is positive ; and b < b' means that b — b' is 
negative — all terms which have been already defined. Cantor remarks 
further that in these definitions one of the numbers may be rational. 
This may be formally justified, in part, by the remark that a denu- 
merable series whose terms are all one and the same rational number is 
a fundamental series, according to the definition ; hence in constructing 

* The symbol (</*) denotes the whole series wliose yth term is a v , not this term 
alone. 



285 


269, 270] Limits and Irrational Numbers 

the differences a„ — a/, by which 6 — 6' is defined, we may put some fixed 
rational a in place of aj for all values of v. But the consequence that 
we can define b — a does not follow, and that for the following reason. 
There is absolutely nothing in the above definition of the real numbers 
to show that a is the real number defined by a fundamental series whose 
terms are all equal to a. The only reason why this seems self-evident is, 
that the definition by limits is unconsciously present, making us think 
that, since .a is plainly the limit of a series whose terms are all equal 
to a, therefore a must be the real number defined by such a series. 
Since, however, Cantor insists — rightly, as I think — that his method 
is independent of limits, which, on the contrary, are to be deduced from 
it (pp. 24 — 5), we must not allow this preconception to weigh with us. 
And the preconception, if I am not mistaken, is in fact erroneous. 
There is nothing in the definitions above enumerated to show that a 
real number and a rational number can ever he either equal or unequal, 
and there are very strong reasons for supposing the contrary, lienee 
also we must reject the proposition (p. 24) that, if b be the real number 
defined bv a fundamental series (✓/,), then 

Lim a ¥ = h. 

V — oc 

Cantor is proud of the supposed fact that his theory renders this pro- 
position strictly demonstrable. But, as we have seen, there is nothing 
to show that a rational can be subtracted from a real number, and 
hence the supposed proof is fallacious. What is true, and what has 
all the mathematical advantages of the above theorem, is this : Con- 
nected with every rational a there is a real number, namely that defined 
by the fundamental series whose terms are all equal to a ; if b be the 
real number defined by a fundamental series (a v ) and if b v lie the real 
number defined by a fundamental series whose terms are all ecjual to a vy 
then (6„) is a fundamental series of real numbers whose limit is b. But 
from this we cannot infer, as Cantor supposes (p. 24), that Lim a v exists ; 
this will only be true in the case where (a v ) has a rational limit. The 
limit of a series of rationals either does not exist, or is rational ; in no 
case is it a real number. But in all cases a fundamental series of 
rationals defines a real number, which is never identical with any 
rational. 

270. Thus to sum up what has been said on Cantor's theory : By 
proving that tw r o fundamental series may have the relation of being 
coherent, and that this relation is symmetrical and transitive, Cantor 
shows, by the help of the principle of abstraction (which is tacitly 
assumed), that two such series both have some one relation to one third 
term, and to no other. This term, when our series consist of rationals, 
we define as the real number which both determine. We can then define 
the rules of operation for real numbers, and the relations of equal, 
greater and less between them. But the principle of abstraction leaves 



286 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxiv 

us in doubt as to what the real numbers really are. One thing* however, 
seems certain. They cannot form part of any series containing rationals, 
for the ratiorjals are relations between integers, while the real numbers 
are not so; and the constitutive relation in virtue of which rationals 
form a series is defined solely by means of the integers between which 
they are relations, so that the same relation cannot hold between two 
real numbers, or between a real and a rational number. In this doubt 
as to what real numbers may be, we find that segments of rationals, as 
defined in the preceding chapter, fulfil all the requirements laid down 
in Cantor’s definition, and also those derived from the principle \of 
abstraction. Hence there is no logical ground for distinguishing seg- 
ments of rationals from real numbers. If they are to be distinguished, 
it must be in virtue of some immediate intuition, or of some wholly new 
axiom, such as, that all series of rationals must have a limit. But this 
would be fatal to the uniform development of Arithmetic and Analysis 
from the five premisses which Peano has found sufficient, and would be 
wholly contrary to the spirit of those who have invented the arithmetical 
theory of irrationals. The above theory, on the contrary, requires no new 
axiom, for if there are rationals, there must be segments of rationals; 
and it removes what seems, mathematically, a wholly unnecessary 
complication, since, if segments will do all that is required of irrationals, 
it seems superfluous to introduce a new parallel series with precisely the 
same mathematical properties. I conclude, then, that an irrational 
actually is a segment of rationals which does not have a limit ; while 
a real number which would be commonly identified with a rational is a 
segment which does have a rational limit ; and this applies, e,g ., to the 
real number defined by a fundamental series of rationals whose terms 
are all equal. This is the theory which was set forth positively in the 
preceding Chapter, and to which, after examining the current theories of 
irrationals, we are again brought back. The greater part of it applies to 
compact series in general ; but some of the uses of fundamental series, 
as we shall see hereafter, presuppose either numerical measurement of 
distances or stretches, or that a denumerable compact series is contained 
in our series in a certain manner*. The whole of it, however, applies to 
any compact series obtained from a progression as the rationals are 
obtained from the integers; and hence no property of numbers is 
involved beyond the fact that they form a progression. 


* JSee Chapter xxxvi. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 


CANTOR’S FIRS'l’ DEFINITION OF CONTINUITY. 


271. Till-: notion of continuity has been treated by philosophers, as 
a rule, as though it were incapable of analysis. They have said many 
things about it, including the Hegelian dictum that everything discrete 
is also continuous and vice verm*. 'Phis remark, as being an exemplifi- 
cation of Hegel’s usual habit of combining opposites, has been tamely 
repeated by all his followers. But as to what they meant by continuity 
and discreteness, they preserved a discreet and continuous silence ; only 
one thing was evident, that whatever they did mean could not be 
relevant to mathematics, or to the philosophy of space and time. 

In the last chapter of Fart III, we agreed provisionally to call a 
series continuous if it had a term between any two. This definition 
usually satisfied Leibnizf, and would have been generally thought 
sufficient until the revolutionary discoveries of Cantor. Nevertheless 
there was reason to surmise, before the time of Cantor, that a higher 
order of continuity is possible. For, ever since the discovery of incom- 
mensurables in Geometry— a discovery of which is the proof set forth in 
the tenth Book of Euclid — it was probable that space had continuity of 
a higher order than that of the rational numbers, which, nevertheless, 
have the kind of continuity defined in Part III. The kind which belongs 
to the rational numbers, and consists in having a term between any two, 
we have agreed to call compactness ; and to avoid confusion, I shall never 
again speak of this kind as continuity. But that other kind of con- 
tinuity, which was seen to belong to space, was treated, as Cantor 
remarks];, as a kind of religious dogma, and was exempted from that 
conceptual analysis which is requisite to its comprehension. Indeed it 
was often held to show, especially by philosophers, that any subject- 
matter possessing it was not validly analyzable into elements. Cantor 
has shown that this view is mistaken, by a precise definition of the kind 

* Logic, Wallace’s Translation, p. 188; Werke, v, p. 201. 

t Phil. Werke, Gerhardt’e ed., Vol. it, p. 515. But cf. Cassirer, Leibniz' System, 
Berlin, 1901, p. 183. 

] Mannichfaltigkeitelehre, p. 28. 



288 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxv 

of continuity which must belong to space. This definition, if it is to 
be explanatory of space, must, as he rightly urges*, be effected without 
any appeal to space. We find, accordingly, in his final definition, only 
ordinal notions of a general kind, which can be fully exemplified in 
Arithmetic. The proof that the notion so defined is precisely the kind 
of continuity belonging to space, must be postponed to Part VI. Cantor 
has given his definition in two forms, of which the earlier is not purely 
ordinal, but involves also either number or quantity. In the present 
chapter, I wish to translate this earlier definition into language as 
simple and untechnical as possible, and then to show how series which 
are continuous in this sense occur in Arithmetic, and generally in the 
theory of any progression whatever. The later definition will be given 
in the following Chapter. 

272. In order that a series should be continuous, it must have two 
characteristics : it must be perfect and cohesive (zusammenhiingend, 
bien enchainee)f. Both these terms have a technical meaning requiring 
considerable explanation. I shall begin with the latter. 

(1) Speaking popularly, a series is cohesive, - or has cohesion, 
when it contains no finite gaps. The precise definition, as given by 
Cantor, is as follows : “We call T a cohesive collection of points, if for 
any two points t and t' of T, for a number e given in advance and as 
small as we please, there are always, in several ways, a finite number of 
points t u belonging to T, such that the distances tt 19 tJ s , . . . 

t v t' are all less than €.”1 This condition, it will be seen, has essential 
reference to distance. It is not necessary that the collection considered 
should consist of numbers, nor that e should be a number. All that is 
necessary is, that the collection should be a series in which there are 
distances obeying the axiom of Archimedes and having no minimum, 
and that e should be an arbitrary distance of the kind presented by 
the series. If the series be the whole field of some asymmetrical 
transitive relation, or if it be the whole of the terms having a certain 
asymmetrical transitive relation to a given term, we may substitute 
stretch for distance ; and even if the series be only part of such a series, 
we may substitute the stretch in the complete series of which our series 
forms part. But we must, in order to give anv meaning to cohesion, 
have something numerically measurable. How far this condition is 
necessary, and what can be done without it, I shall show at a later 
stage. It is through this condition that our discussions of quantity 
and measurement, in Part III, become relevant to the discussion of 
continuity. 

* Acta Math, ii, p. 403. 

t Acta Math, n, pp. 405, 40(5; Marmichfaftigkeitstehre, p. 31. 

J The words “in several ways” seem superfluous. They are omitted by Vivanti: 
see FormuUnre dt Mathematiques, Vol. i, vi, § 1, No. 22. 



289 


271,272] Cantor's first definition of Continuity 

If the distances or stretches in our series do not obey the axiom of 
Archimedes, there are some among them that are incapable of a finite 
numerical measure in terms of some others among them. In this case, 
there is no longer an analogy of the requisite kind with either the 
rational or the real numbers, and the series is necessarily not 
cohesive. For let 8, d be two distances ; let them be such that, for any 
finite number n, nh is less than d. In this case, if 8 be the distance e, and 
d be the distance tt\ it is plain that the condition of cohesion cannot 
be satisfied. Such cases actually occur, and — what seems paradoxical — 
they can be created by merely interpolating terms in certain cohesive 
series. For example, the series of segments of rationals is cohesive ; 
and when these segments have rational limits, the limits are not 
contained in them. Add now to the series what may be called the 
completed segments, i.c. the segments having rational limits together 
with their limits. These are new terms, forming part of the same series, 
since they have the relation of whole and part to the former terms. But 
now the difference between a segment and the corresponding completed 
segment consists of a single rational, while all other differences in the 
series consist of an infinite number of rationals. Thus the axiom of 
Archimedes fails, and the new series is not cohesive. 

The condition that distances in the series are to have no minimum is 
satisfied by real or rational numbers; and it is necessary, if cohesion 
is to be extended to non-numerical series, that, when any unit distance 
is selected, there should be distances whose numerical measure is less 
than €, where € is any rational number. For, if there be a minimum 
distance, we cannot make our distances tt 19 less than this minimum, 

which is contrary to the definition of cohesion. And there must not 
only be no minimum to distances in general, but there must be no 
minimum to distances from any given term. Hence every cohesive series 
must be compact, i.e . must have a term between any two. 

It must not be supposed, however, that every compact series is 
cohesive. Consider, for example, the series formed of 0 and 2 — wi/n, 
where m, n arc any integers such that m is less than n. Here there 
is a term between any two, but the distance from 0 cannot be 
made less than 1. Henc'e the series, though compact, is not co- 
hesive. This series, however, is not complete, being part only of the 
series of rationals, by means of which its distances are measured. In 
a complete series, the conditions are somewhat different. We must 
distinguish two cases, according as there are or are not distances, 
(a) If there are distances, and equal distances do not correspond to 
equal stretches, it may happen that, though the series is compact, the 
distances from some term never become less than some finite distance. 
This case would be presented by magnitudes, if we were to accept 
Meinong’s opinion that the distance of any finite magnitude from zero 
is always infinite (op. cit, p. 84). It is presented by numbers, if we 



290 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxv 

measure distances (as there are many reasons for doing) by log xjy. 
Thus in this case, with regard to distances, the series is not cohesive, 
though it is complete and compact. ( b ) If there are no distances, 
but only stretches, then, assuming the axiom of Archimedes, any stretch 
will be less than we, for a suitable value of n. Hence, dividing 
the stretch into w parts, one at least of these will be less than e. But 
there is no way of proving that all can be made less than e, unless we 
assume either the axiom of linearity (that any stretch can be divided 
into w equal parts), or a more complicated but more general axiom, to 
the effect that a stretch d can be divided into n parts, each of which is 
greater than d / (w -|- 1 ) and less than d / ( n — 1 ), whatever integer n may 
be. With this axiom and the axiom of Archimedes, a complete compact 
series must be cohesive ; but these two axioms together render com- 
pleteness superfluous and compactness redundant. Thus we see that 
cohesion is in almost all cases a condition distinct from compactness. 
Compactness is purely serial, while cohesion has essential reference to 
numbers or to the conditions of numerical measurement. Cohesion 
implies compactness, but compactness never implies cohesion, except 
in the sole case of the complete series of rationals or real numbers. 

273. (2) To explain what is meant bv a perfect series is more 

difficult. A series is perfect when it coincides with its first derivative*. 
To explain this definition, we must examine the notion of the derivatives 
of a series’}*, and this demands an explanation of a limiting-point of a 
series. Speaking generally, the terms of a series are of two kinds, those 
which Cantor calls isolated points, and those which he calls limiting- 
points. A finite series has only isolated points ; an infinite series must 
define at least one limiting-point, though this need not belong to the 
series. A limiting-point of a series is defined by Cantor to be a term 
such that, in any interval containing the term, there are an infinite 
number of terms of the series ( ib . p. 343). The definition is given in 
terms of the points on a line, but it has no essential reference to space. 
The limiting-point may or may not be a term of the original series. 
The assemblage of all limiting-points is called the first derivative of the 
series. The first derivative of the first derivative is called the second 
derivative, and so on. Peano gives the definition of the first derivative 
of a class of real numbers as follows : Let u be a class of real numbers, 
and let x be a real number (which may or may not be a u) such that the 
lower limit of the absolute values of the differences of x from terms of u 
other than x is zero ; then the class of terms x satisfying this condition 
is the first derivative of «+• This definition is virtually identical with 
that of Cantor, but it brings out more explicitly the connection of the 
derivative with limits. A series, then, is perfect, when it consists of 

* Acta Math, ii, p. 40.5. t lb. pp. 341-4. 

J Formulae re, Vol. ii, No. 3 (1899), § 71, 1*0 and 4*0. 



291 


272 - 274 ] Cantor s first definition of Continuity 

exactly the same terms as its first derivative ; i.e. when all its points are 
limiting-points, and all its limiting-points belong to it. 

274 . But with regard to the latter point, namely, that all limiting- 
points of the series must belong to it, some explanation is necessary. 
Take, for example, the series of rational numbers. Every rational 
number is the limit of some series of rational numbers, and thus the 
rationals are contained in their first derivative. But as regards those 
series of rationals which do not have a rational limit, we agreed in the 
preceding chapter that they do not have a limit at all. Hence all series 
of rationals which have a limit have a rational limit, and therefore, by 
the letter of the definition, the rationals should form a perfect series. 
But this is not the case. Cantor, as we saw in connection with irrationals, 
believes, what we were compelled to regard as erroneous, that every series 
fulfilling certain conditions, which may be called the conditions of con- 
vergency, must have a limit. Hence he regards those series of rationals 
which have no rational limit as having an irrational limit, and as therefore 
having a limit not belonging to the series of rationals ; and therefore the 
series of rationals does not contain all the terms of its first derivative. 
In fact, the first derivative of the rational numbers is held to be the real 
numbers. But when we regard the real numbers as segments of rationals, 
it is impossible to take this view; and when we deny the existence- 
theorem for limits, it is necessary to modify Cantor’s definition of 
perfection*. This modification we must now examine. 

What we must say is, that a series is perfect when all its points are 
limiting- points, and when further, any series being chosen out of our 
first series, if this new series is of the sort which is usually regarded as 
defining a limit, then it actually has a limit belonging to our first series. 
To make this statement precise, we must examine what are the condi- 
tions usually considered as defining a limit. In the case of denumerable 
series, they are simple, and have already been set forth. They come to 
this, that, given any distance e, however small, all the terms of our series 
after some definite term, say the mth, are such that any two of them 
have a difference whose absolute value is less than €. This statement, 
it will be seen, involves either number or quantity, i.e . it is not purely 
ordinal. It is a curious fact that, though the supposed condition for 
the existence of a limit cannot, by our present method, be stated in 
purely ordinal terms, the limit of a denumerable series, if there be one, 
can always be defined in purely ordinal terms. I shall distinguish 
Cantor’s fundamental series in a compact series into progressions and 
regressions, according as earlier terms have to later ones always the 

relation P, or always the relation P (where P is the generating relation 
of the compact series in which the said progressions and regressions are 

* This point is ably discussed by Couturat, Revue de Met . et de Morale, March, 
1900, p. 167. 



292 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxv 

contained). The compact series is further assumed to be complete. A 
term x is then the limit of a progression, if every term of the progression 
has to x the relation P, while every term which has to x the relation P 
also has this relation to some term of the progression. This definition, 
it will be seen, is purely ordinal ; and a similar definition will apply to a 
regression. 

Let us examine next what are the usual conditions for the existence 
of a limit to a non -denumerable series. When we come to examine 
non-numerical series, we shall find it inconvenient to be restricted to 
denumerable series, and therefore it will be well to consider other series 
at once. Here, of course, if any denumerable series contained in our 
larger series fulfils the conditions for a limit, there will be a corresponding 
definition of a limiting-point in our larger series. And the upper or 
lower limit of the whole or part of our larger series, if there is one, may 
be defined exactly as in the case of a progression or a regression. But 
general conditions for the existence of a limit cannot be laid down, 
except by reference to denumerable series contained in our larger series. 
And it will be observed that Cantor's definition of a limiting-point 
assumes the existence of such a point, and cannot l>e turned into a 
definition of the conditions under which there are such points. This 
illustrates the great importance of Cantor's fundamental series. 

The method of segments will, however, throw some light on this 
matter. We saw in Chapter xxxm that any class of terms in a series 
defines a segment, and that this segment sometimes can, but sometimes 
cannot, be defined by a single term. When it can be so defined, this term 
is its upper limit ; and if this term does not belong to the class by which 
the segment was defined, then it is also the upper limit of that class. 
But when the segment has no upper limit, then the class by which the 
segment was defined also has no upper limit. In all cases, however — 
and this is one of the chief virtues of segments — the segment defined by 
an infinite class which has no upper limit is the upper limit of the 
segments defined by the several members of the class. Thus, whether 
or not the class has an upper limit, the segments which its various 
terms define always have one — provided, that is, that the compact series 
in which the class is contained has terms coming after all terms of 
the class. 

We can now express, without assuming the existence of limits in 
cases where this is not demonstrable, what is meant by a series containing 
its first derivative. When any class of terms is contained in a compact 
series, the conditions which are commonly said to insure the existence 
of an upper limit to the class, though they do not insure this, do insure 
an upper limit to the class of segments defined by the several members 
of the class. And as regards lower limits, the same proposition holds 
concerning what we called upper segments. Hence we may define : A 
class u of terms forming the whole or part of a series is perfect when 



293 


274 , 275 ] Cantors first definition of Continuity 

each of the terms of u is the upper or lower limit of some class contained 
in «, and when, if be any class contained in ?/, and the lower segments 
defined by the several members of v have an upper limit, or the upper 
segments have a lower limit, this limiting segment is one of those that 
can be defined by a single term of ?/, i.e. have a term of it for their 
upper or lower limit respectively. This definition, it must be admitted, 
is more complicated than Cantor’s, but it is free from the unjustifiable 
assumption of the existence of limits. 

We may repeat the definition of perfection in what is perhaps less 
difficult language. Given any series, and any class of terms u contained 
in this series, there are an upper and a lower segment corresponding to 
every term of it . Any infinite set of terms v being chosen out of //, 
there are certain conditions which are commonly said to insure that v 
has an upper limit, which, it is admitted, may belong neither to w, nor 
to the series in which it is contained. What these conditions do insure, 
however, is that the class of lower segments corresponding to r has an 
upper limit. If the series is perfect, v will have an upper limit whenever 
the corresponding class of segments has one, and this upper limit of v 
will be a term of u. The definition of perfection requires that this 
should hold both for upper and lower limits, and for any class v con- 
tained in it. 

275. As the question concerning the existence of limits, which has 
necessitated the above complication, is one of some philosophical im- 
portance, I shall repeat the arguments against assuming the existence 
of limits in the class of series to which the rational numbers belong. 
Where a series is imperfect, while its first derivative is perfect, there 
the first derivative is logically prior to its own formation. That is to 
say, it is only by presupposing the perfect series that it can be shown 
to be the derivative of the imperfect series. We have already seen that 
this is the case with individual irrational numbers; it is easy to see 
that the principle is general. Wherever the derivative contains a term 
not belonging to the original series, that term is the limit of some 
denumerable series forming an integral part of the first series. If this 
series with a limit have the general term « w , then — wording the defi- 
nition so as not to apply only to series of numbers — there is always a 
definite number r/i, for any specified distance e, however small, such 
that, if n is greater than w, the distance between #»+,, and a n is less 
than e, whatever positive integer p may be. From this it is inferred 
that the series ( a n ) has a limit, and it is shown that, in many cases, 
this limit cannot belong to the series out of which the series (a 7l ) was 
chosen. But the inference that there is a limit is precarious. It may 
be supported either by previous knowledge of the term which is the 
limit, or by some axiom necessitating the existence of such a term. 
When the term which is the limit is independently known, it may be 
easily shown to be the limit. But when it is not known, it cannot be 



294 


Infinity and Continuity . [chap, xxxv 

proved to exist at all, unless we introduce some axiom of continuity. 
Such an axiom is introduced by Dedekind, but we saw that his axiom 
is unsatisfactory. The principle of abstraction, which shows that two 
coherent series have something in common, is fully satisfied by segments. 
And in some cases, among which is that of the rationals, it seems that 
the constitutive relation of the imperfect series cannot hold between any 
terms not belonging to this series, so that the existence of limits not 
belonging to the series is wholly impossible. For a limit must have 
a certain position in a series of which the series which it limits forms 
part, and this requires some constitutive relation of which the limit, as 
well as the terms limited, must be capable. An independent complete 
series, such as the rationals, cannot, in fact, have any limiting-points 
not belonging to it. For, if R be the constitutive relation, and two 
terms a, ft, have the relation //, any third term c, which has this relation 
or its converse to either, and therefore both, of the terms «, ft, belongs 
to the same series as a and ft. But the limit, if it exists, must have the 
constitutive relation to the terms w hich it limits ; hence it must belong 
to the complete series to which they belong. Hence any series which 
has actual limiting-points not belonging to it is only part of some 
complete series ; and a complete series which is not perfect is one in 
which the limits defined in the usual way, but not belonging to the 
series, do not exist at all. Hence, in any complete series, either some 
definable limits do not exist, or the series contains its first derivative. 

In order to render the arbitrariness of assuming the existence of 
limits still more evident, let us endeavour to set up an axiom of con- 
tinuity more irreproachable than Dedekind's. We shall find that it can 
still be denied with perfect impunity. 

When a number of positions in a series continually differ less and 
less from each other, and are known to be all on one side of some given 
position, there must exist (so our axiom might run) some position to 
which they approximate indefinitely, so that no distance can be specified 
so small that they will not approach nearer than by this distance. If 
this axiom be admitted, it will follow that all imperfect series, whose 
first derivatives are perfect, presuppose these first derivatives, and are to 
be regarded as selections from them. Let us examine the consequences 
of denying our axiom in the case of a series of numbers. In this 
case, the unwary might suppose, the position next to all the terms 
«n, but not belonging to them, would be (say) p, where p — On is 
greater than €, for a suitable value of e, whatever n may be. But 
if our series is compact, there is a term between p and p — e, say p . 
Thus p' — a n is less than p — a n > whatever n may be. Thus p' is 
nearer all the as than p is, contrary to the hypothesis. But the 
above denial was not direct , and the fact that it seemed correct 
illustrates the fallacies which in this subject are hard to avoid. The 
axiom is : There is a term to which the cC s approach as near as we like. 



295 


275 ] Cantor's first definition of Continuity 

The denial was : There is a term nearest to the a’s, hut at a finite 
distance. The denial should have been: There is no term to which 
the a’s approach as near as we like. In other words, whatever term we 
specify, say p, there is some finite distance e, such that p- a* is greater 
than e, whatever a* may be. This is true in the case of series of rational 
numbers which have no rational limit. In this case, there is no term 
nearest to the a’s, but at a finite distance, while also, whatever term 
beyond all the a' s we specify (except where our series has a rational 
limit), none of the a's approach nearer to this term than by a certain 
finite distance «. Every term beyond the a's is at more than some 
finite distance from all of them, but there is no finite distance which 
every term beyond the a’s exceeds. The introduction of irrationals 
introduces symmetry into this odd state of things, so that there is a 
term to which the a's approach indefinitely, as well as a series of terms 
indefinitely approaching the a's. When irrationals are not admitted, 
if we have a term p after all the a's, and a small distance t, then, if e 
be specified, p can be chosen so that p - a n is less than e, whatever n 
may be ; but if p be sj>ecified, an e can always be found (except when 
the limit is rational) so that p-a tl is greater than f, whatever n may be. 
This state of things, though curious, is not self-contradictory. The 
admission of irrationals, as opposed to segments, is thus logically un- 
necessary; as it is also mathematically superfluous, and fatal to the 
theory of rationals, there are no reasons in its favour, and strong reasons 
against it. Hence, finally, any axiom designed to show the existence 
of limits in cases where they cannot otherwise be shown to exist, is 
to be rejected ; and Cantor’s definition of perfection must lie modified 
as above. This conclusion will, in future, be regarded as established. 

Having now analyzed Cantor’s earlier definition of continuity, I shall 
proceed to examine his later ordinal definition, and the application of 
its various portions to series more general than those of numbers, 
showing, if possible, the exact points in which these various portions 
are required. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 


ORDINAL CONTINUITY*. 

276. The definition of continuity which we examined in the pre- 
ceding chapter was, as we saw, not purely ordinal ; it demanded, in at 
least two points, some reference to either numbers, or numerically 
measurable magnitudes. Nevertheless continuity seems like a purely 
ordinal notion ; and this has led Cantor to construct a definition which 
is free from all elements extraneous to on! erf. I shall now examine 
this definition, as well as others which may be suggested. We shall find 
that, so long as all references to number and quantity are excluded, there 
are theorems of great importance, especially as regards fundamental 
series, which, with any suggested ordinal definition except that of 
Cantor, remain indemonstrable, and are presumably sometimes false \ — 
a fact from which the merits of Cantor's definition, now to be given, are 
apparent. 

277. Cantors definition of the continuum in his later article^ is as 
follows. We start (§ 9) from the type of series presented by the rational 
numbers greater than 0 and less than 1, in their order of magnitude. 
This type we call tj. A series of this type we define by the following 
marks. (1) It is denumerable, that is, by taking its terms in a suitable 
order (which, however, must be different from that in which they are 
given), we can give them a one-one correspondence with the finite 
integers. (2) The series has no first or last term. (3) There is a term 
between any two, Z.r. the series is compact ( uberall dirht). It is then 
proved that these three characteristics completely define the type of 
older presented by the rationals, that is to say, there is a one-one 
correspondence, between any two series having these three properties, in 
which earlier terms correspond to earlier terms, and later ones to later 
ones. This is established by the use of mathematical induction, which 
is applicable in virtue of the fact that series of this type arc denumer- 

* The present chapter deals with the same subject a* M. Couturat s article, <( Sur 
la definition du Continu,” Heme de Meta physique et de Morale , March, 11)00. 1 agree 
in the main with this article, in which much of what 1 said in the preceding chapter, 
and shall say in this, will be found. 

+ Math. Atma/eu, xlvi. 

+ Mathematical proofs of such theorems as are not already well known will be 
found in RdM, vij, it 

§ Math. Anna leu, xnvi, § 11. 



276 , 277 ] Ordinal Continuity 297 

able. Thus all series which are denumerable, endless*, and compact, 
are ordinally similar. We now proceed (§ 10) to the consideration of 
fundamental series contained in any one-dimensional series M. We 
show (as has been already explained) what is meant by calling two 
fundamental series coherent , and we give an ordinal definition of the 
limit of a fundamental series, namely, in the case of a progression, the 
limit comes after the whole progression, but every term before the limit 
comes before some term of the progression ; with a corresponding 
definition for the limit of a regression. We prove that no fundamental 
series can have more than one limit, and that, if a fundamental series 
has a limit, this is also the limit of all coherent series; also that two 
fundamental series, of which one is part of the other, are coherent. Any 
term of M which is the limit of some fundamental series in M is called 
a principal term of M. If all the tenns of M are principal terms, M is 
called condensed in ite/f (insichdicht), If every fundamental series in M 
has a limit in M y M is called closed (abgeschlossen)f. If M is both 
closed and condensed in itself, it is perfect. All these properties, if they 
belong to Jf, belong to any series which is ordinally similar to M. 
With these preparations, we advance at last to the definition of the 
continuum (§11). Let 0 be the type of the series to which belong the 
real numbers from 0 to 1 , both inclusive. Then 0, as we know, is a 
perfect type. But this alone does not characterize 6 . It has further 
the property of containing within itself a series of the type 17 , to which 
the rationals belong, in such a way that between any two terms 
of the 0-series there are terms of the ^-series. Hence the following 
definition of the continuum : 

A one-dimensional continuum M is a series which (1) is perfect, 
( 2 ) contains within itself a denumerable series S of which there are 
terms between any two terms of M. 

In this definition, it is not necessary to add the other properties 
which are required to show that S is of the type rj. For if S had a first 
or last term, this would be also the first or last term of M ; hence we 
could take it away from S, and the remaining series would still satisfy 
the condition ( 2 ), but would have no first or last term; and the 
condition ( 2 ) together with (1) insures that S is a compact series. 
Cantor proves that any series M satisfying the above conditions is ordi- 
nally similar to the number-continuum, i.e. the real numbers from 0 to 1 , 
both inclusive; and hence it follows that the above definition includes 
precisely the same class of series as those that were included in his 
former definition. He does not assert that his new definition is purely 
ordinal, and it might be doubted, at first sight, whether it is so. Let 
us see for ourselves whether any extra-ordinal notions are contained in it. 

* I.e. having neither a beginning nor an end. 

t Not to be confounded with the elementary sense of a closed series discussed in 
Fart IV. 



298 


Infinity and Continuity [ chap , xxxvi 

278. The only point as to which any doubt could arise is with 
regard to the condition of being denumerable. To be a denumerable 
collection is to be a collection whose terms are all the terms of some 
progression. This notion, so far, is purely ordinal. But in the case 
supposed, that of the rationals or of any ordinally similar series, the 
terms forming the series must be capable of two orders, in one of which 
they form a compact series, while in the other they form a progression. 
To discover whether or not a given set of terms is capable of these two 
orders, will in general demand other than ordinal conditions; never- 
theless, the notion itself is purely ordinal. Now we know, from the 
similarity of all such series to the series of rationals (which involves only 
ordinal ideas), that no such series is perfect. But it remains to be seen 
whether we can prove this without appealing to the special properties 
of the rationals which result from there being a series in which there is 
distance. We know, as a matter of fact, that no denumerable series can 
be perfect*, but we want here a purely ordinal proof of this theorem. 
Such a proof, however, is easily given. For take the terms of our 
denumerable compact series S in the order in which they form a 
progression, and in this order call them u. Starting with the first in 
this order, which we will call j 0 , there must be one which, in the other 
order S 9 follows this term. Take the first such term, .r, , as the second 
in a fundamental series v. This term has a finite number of predecessors 
in the progression w., and therefore has successors in S which are also 
successors in w; for the number of successors in S is always infinite. 
Take the first of these common successors, say .r 2 , as the third term of 
our fundamental series v. Proceeding in this way, we can construct an 
ascending fundamental series in *$ y , the terms of which have the same 
order in u as in S. This series cannot have a limit in S, for each term x n 
succeeds, in every term which precedes it in u. Hence any term of S 
will be surpassed by some term or n of our fundamental series v, and 
hence this fundamental series has no limit in S. The theorem that a 
denumerable endless series cannot be perfect is, therefore, purely ordinal. 
From this point onwards there is no difficulty, and our former theory of 
segments enables us to state the matter simply. Given a denumerable, 
endless, compact series S, construct all the segments defined by funda- 
mental series in S. These form a perfect series, and between any two 
terms of the series of segments there is a segment whose upper (or 
lower) limit is a term of S . Segments of this kind, which may be called 
rational segments, are a series of the same type as S , and are contained 
in the whole series of segments in the required manner. Hence the 
ordinal definition of the continuum is complete. 

279. It must not be supposed that continuity as above defined can 
only be exemplified, in Arithmetic, by the devious course from integers 
to rationals, and thence to real numbers. On the contrary, the integers 

* Acta Mathematica , ii, p. 409. 



278 - 280 ] Ordinal Continuity 299 

themselves can be made to illustrate continuity. Consider all possible 
infinite classes of integers, and let them be arranged on the following 
plan. Of two classes u 9 r, of which the smallest number in u is less than 
the smallest in v, u comes first. If the first n terms of u and v are 
identical, but the (w + l) th terms are different, that which has the 
smaller (n + l) th term is to come first. This series has a first term, 
namely, the whole class of the integers, but no last term. Any completed 
segment of the series, however, is a continuous series, as the reader can 
easily see for himself. The denumerable compact series contained in it 
is composed of those infinite classes which contain all numbers greater 
than some number, i.c. those containing all but a finite number of 
numbers. Thus classes of finite integers alone suffice to generate con- 
tinuous series. 

280. The above definition, it will be observed, depends upon pro- 
gressions. As progressions are the very essence of discreteness, it seems 
paradoxical that we should require them in defining continuity*. And, 
after all, as it is certain that people have not in the past associated any 
precise idea with the word continuity , the definition we adopt is, in some 
degree, arbitrary. Series having the properties enumerated in Cantor’s 
definition would generally be called continuous, but so would many others 
which his definition excludes. In any case it will be a valuable inquiry 
to ask what can be done by compact series without progressions. 

Let u be any endless compact series, whose generating relation is P 9 
and concerning which nothing further is known. Then, by means of any 
term or any class of terms in u 9 we can define a segment of u. Let us 
denote by U the class of all lower segments of u. A lower segment, it 
may be well to repeat, is a class v of terms contained in w, not null, 
and not coextensive with u , and such that v has no last term, and 
every term preceding a v is a v. In the converse case, when v has 
no first term, and every term following a v is a v 9 v is called an 
upper segment. It is then easy to prove that every segment consists 
of all the terms preceding (or following) either some single term of w, or 
a variable term of some class of terms of u ; and that every single term, 
and every class of terms, defines an upper and a lower segment in this 
manner. Then, if V denote the class of upper segments, it is easy to 
prove that both U and V are again endless compact series, whose 
generating relation is that of w hole or part ; while if u has one or two 
ends, so have U and F, though the end-terms are not segments according 
to the definition. If we now proceed to the consideration of segments 

♦Mr Whitehead has shown that the following simpler definition is equivalent 
to Cantor’s. A series is continuous when (1) every segment, upper or lower, has a 
limit, and the series has a first and a last term ; (2) a denumerable compact series is 
contained in it in such a way that there are terms of this latter series between any 
two terms of our original series. In this definition, progressions are relevant only 
in defining a denumerable series. 



800 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxvi 

in <7 or V (U say), we shall find that the segment of IP s defined by any 
class whatever of fTs can always be defined by a single U y which, if the 
class is infinite and has no last term, is the upper limit of the class, and 
which, in all cases, is the logical sum of all the members of the class — 
members which, it must he remembered, are all themselves classes 
contained in u 9 . Hence all classes contained in U and having no last 
term have an upper limit in U; and also (what is a distinct proposition) 
all classes contained in U and having no first term have a lower limit 
in U y except in the case where the lower limit is the logical zero or 
null-class ; and the lower limit is always the logical product of all the 
classes composing the class which it limits. Thus by adding to V the 
null-class, we insure that U shall be a closed series. There is a sense 
in which U is condensed in itself, namely, this : every term of U is the 
upper limit of a suitably chosen class contained in 77, for every term is 
the upper limit of the segment of IPs which it defines ; and every term 
of U is a lower limit of the class of those U\ of which it is a proper 
part. But there is absolutely no proof, so far at least as I have been 
able to discover, that every term of U is the upper or lower limit of a 
fundamental series. There is no a priori reason why, in any series, the 
limit of any class should always be also the limit of a fundamental 
series ; this seems, in fact, to be a prerogative of series of the types to 
which rationals and real numbers respectively belong. In our present 
case, at least, though our series is, in the above general sense, condensed 
in itself, there seems no reason for supposing its terms to be all of them 
limits of fundamental series, and in this special sense the series may not 
be condensed in itself. 

281. It is instructive to examine the result of confining the terms 
of U to such segments as can be defined by fundamental series. In this 
case it is well to consider, in addition to upper and lower segments, their 
supplements, as they may lx? called, of which I shall shortly give the 
definition. Let a compact series r be given, generated by a transitive 
asymmetrical relation P, and let u be any fundamental series in v. If 
earlier terms of n have to later ones the relation P, I shall call u a 
progression ; if the relation I\ I shall call u a regression. If now w be 
any class whatever contained in r, w defines, as we have already seen, 
four other classes in r, namely (1) the class of terms before every iv y 
which I shall call wir ; (2) the class of terms after every re?, which I shall 
call ivtt ; (3) the class of terms before some w y which I shall call n rw\ 
(4) the class of terms after some w, which I shall call ? rw. The classes 
(3) and (4) are lower and upper segments respectively ; the classes (1) and 

l * The definition of the logical sum of the members of a class of classes, in a form 
not involving fiuitude, is, 1 believe, due to Peano. It is as follows : Let w be a class 
of classes ; then the logical sum of the members of w is the class of terms x such that 
there is some class belonging to w, to which x belongs. See Formulaire, Vol. ii, 
Part 1 (1897), No. 4G1. 



280, 281] Ordinal Continuity 301 

(2) are supplements to (4) and (3) respectively, and I shall call them 
supplemental segments. When w has an upper limit, this is the first term 
of zrir, and thus zrif is not a segment, since no upper segment has a first 
term. But when w has no upper limit, then, whether w be finite or 
infinite, aw is a segment. Similar remarks apply to lower limits. If w 
has a last term, this belongs neither to mv nor to rw, but all other terms 
of v belong to one or other class ; if w has no last term, all terms of v 
belong to me or zcw. Similar remarks apply to wir and irw. Applying 
these general definitions to the cases of progressions and regressions, 
we shall find that, for a progression, only the classes (2) and (3) are 
important; for a regression, only the classes (1) and (4). The question 
where a progression begins or a regression ends is quite unimportant. 
Since a progression has no last term, and a regression no first term, 
the segment defined by either, together with its supplement, contains 
every term of v. Whether progressions and regressions in v have limits 
always, sometimes, or never, there seems no way of deciding from the 
given premisses. I have not been able to discover an instance of a 
compact series where they never have limits, but I cannot find any proof 
that such an instance is impossible. 

Proceeding now to classes of segments, as we proceeded before to our 
class U, we have here four such classes to consider, namely : (1 ) The class 
vi r, each of whose terms is the class vir defined by some regression u 9 
ie. 9 the terms of v which come before all the terms of some regression in 
v ; (2) the class vtt 9 consisting of all the classes inr defined by pro- 
gressions u ; (3) the class irv, whose terms are i ru, where u is some 
progression ; (4) the class vir, whose terms are uir, where u is some 
regression. Each of these four classes is a class of classes, for its terms 
are classes contained in v. Each of the four is itself a compact series. 
There is no way of proving, so far as I know, that (1) and (3), or (2) 
and (4), have any common terms. Each pair would have a common 
term if v contained a progression and a regression which were coherent, 
and had no limit in v, but there is no way of discovering whether this 
case ever arises in the given series v. 

When we come to examine whether the four classes thus defined are 
condensed in themselves, we obtain the most curious results. Every 
fundamental series in any one of the four classes has a limit, but not 
necessarily in the series of which its terms are composed, and conversely, 
every term of each of our four classes is the limit of a fundamental 
series, but not necessarily of a series contained in the same class to which 
the limiting term belongs. The state of things, in fact, is as follows : 

Every progression in vi r or irv has a limit in irv . 

Every progression in vir or ttv has a limit in ttv. 

Every regression in vir or irv has a limit in vir. 

Every regression in vir or irv has a limit in vir . 

Every term of vir is the limit of a regression in vir and of one in irv. 



302 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxvi 

Every term of vir is the limit of a regression in vir and of one in irv. 

Every term of n rv is the limit of a progression in vir and of one 
in irv. 

Every term of 7 tv is the limit of a progression in vir and of one 
in 7 tv. 

Hence z» 7 r is identical with the class of limits of regressions in vir or irv\ 

vir is identical with the class of limits of regressions in vn r or 7 rv ; 

irv is, identical with the class of limits of progressions in vtt or irv ; 

7 tv is identical with the class of limits of progressions in irv or vtt. 

Thus each of our four classes has a kind of one-sided perfection ; 
two of the four are perfect on one side, the other two on the other. 
But I cannot prove of any one of the four classes that it is wholly 
perfect. We might attempt the combination of vtt and ttv, and also of 
vir and irv. For vir and irv together form one series, whose generating 
relation is still whole and part. This series will be perfect, and will 
contain the limits alike of progressions and of regressions in itself. But 
this series may not be compact ; for if there be any progression u and 
regression u in r, which both have the same limit in v (a case which, as 
we know, occurs in some compact series), then iru and uir will be 
consecutive terms of the series formed of irv and vir together, for uir 
will contain the common limit, while iru will not contain it, but 
all other terms of v will belong to both or to neither. Hence when our 
series is compact, we cannot show that it is perfect ; and when we have 
made it perfect, we can show that it may not be compact. And a 
series which is not compact can hardly be called continuous. 

Although we can prove that, in our original compact series z;, there 
are an infinite number of progressions coherent with a given progression 
and having no term in common with it, we cannot prove that there is 
even one regression coherent with a given progression ; nor can we 
prove that any progression or regression in v has a limit, or that 
any term of v is a limit of a progression or regression. We cannot 
prove that any progression u and regression u are such that iru = uir, 
nor yet that iru and uir may differ by only a single term of v. Nor, 
finally, can we prove that any single progression in vir has a limit in vir , 
with similar propositions concerning the other three classes z>?r, irv , irv. 
At least, I am unable to discover any way of proving any of these 
theorems, though in the absence of instances of the falsity of some 
of them it seems not improbable that these may be demonstrable. 

If it is the fact — as it seems to be — that, starting only from a 
compact series, so many of the usual theorems are indemonstrable, 
we see how fundamental is the dependence of Cantor’s ordinal theory 
upon the condition that the compact series from which we start is to be 
denumerable. As soon as this assumption is made, it becomes easy 
to prove all those of the above propositions which hold concerning the 
types 17 and 0 respectively. This is a fact which is obviously of con- 



281, 282] Ordinal Continuity 303 

sidcrable philosophical importance ; and it is with a view of bringing it 
out clearly that I have dwelt so long upon compact series which 
are not assumed to be denumerable. 

282. The remark which we made just now, that two compact 
series may be combined to form one which sometimes has consecutive 
terms, is rather curious, and applies equally to continuity as defined by 
Cantor. Segments of rationals form a continuous scries, and so do 
completed segments (i.c. segments together with their limits) ; but the 
two together form a series which is not compact, and therefore not 
continuous. It is certainly contrary to the usual idea of continuity 
that a continuous series should cease to be so merely by the interpolation 
of new terms between the old ones. This should, according to the usual 
notions, make our series still more continuous. It might be suggested 
that, philosophically speaking, a series cannot he called continuous unless 
it is complete , i.e. contains a certain term together with all the terms 
having to the given term a specified asymmetrical transitive relation or its 
converse. If we add this condition, the series of segments of rationals is 
not complete with regard to the relation by which we have hitherto 
regarded it as generated, since it does not consist of all classes of 
rationals to which a given segment has the relation of whole and part, 
and each of which contains all terms less than any one of its terms — 
this condition is also satisfied by completed segments. But every series 
is complete with regard to some relation, simple or complex. This is 
the reason why completeness need not, from a mathematical standpoint, 
be mentioned in the definition of continuity, since it can always be 
insured by a suitable choice of the generating relation. 

We have now seen in what Cantoris definition of continuity consists, 
and we have seen that, while instances fulfilling the definition may 
be found in Arithmetic, the definition itself is purely ordinal — the only 
datum required is a denumerable compact series. Whether or not the 
kind of series which Cantor defines as continuous is thought to be the 
most similar to what has hitherto been vaguely denoted by the word, 
the definition itself, and the steps leading to it, must be acknowledged 
to be a triumph of analysis and generalization. 

Before entering upon the philosophical questions raised by the 
continuum, it will be well to continue our review of Cantor’s most 
remarkable theorems, by examining next his transfinite cardinal and 
ordinal numbers. Of the two problems with which this Part is 
concerned, we have hitherto considered only continuity ; it is now time 
to consider what* mathematics has to say concerning infinity. Only 
when this has been accomplished, shall we be in a position adequately 
to discuss the closely allied philosophical problems of infinity and 
continuity. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 


TRANSFINITE CARDINALS. 

283. The mathematical theory of infinity may almost be said 
to begin with Cantor. The Infinitesimal Calculus, though it cannot 
wholly dispense with infinity, has as few dealings with it as possible, 
and contrives to hide it away before facing the world. Cantor has 
abandoned this cowardly policy, and has brought the skeleton out of its 
cupboard. He has been emboldened in this course by denying that it 
is a skeleton. Indeed, like many other skeletons, it was wholly 
dependent on its cupboard, and vanished in the light of day. Speaking 
without metaphor, Cantor has established a new branch of Mathematics, 
in which, by mere correctness of deduction, it is shown that the 
supposed contradictions of infinity all depend upon extending, to the 
infinite, results which, while they can be proved concerning finite 
numbers, are in no sense necessarily true of all numbers. In this theory, 
it is necessary to treat separately of cardinals and ordinals, which are 
far more diverse in their properties when they are transfinite than when 
they are finite. Following the same order as previously — the order 
which seems to me to be alone philosophically correct — I shall begin 
with transfinite cardinals*. 

284. The transfinite cardinals, which are also called poicers, may be 
defined in the first place so as to include the finite cardinals, leaving it 
to be investigated in what respects the finite and the transfinite are 
distinguished. Thus Cantor gives the following definition - ^. 

“We call the power or cardinal number of M that general idea 
which, by means of our active faculty of thought, is deduced from the 
collection M, by abstracting from the nature of its diverse elements and 
from the order in which they are given.” 

This, it will be seen, is merely a phrase indicating what is to be 
spoken of, not a true definition. It presupposes that eveiy collection 

* This is the order followed in Math. Annalen, xlvi, but not in the Mannkh- 
faUigkeittkhre. 

t Math. Annahm, xlvi, § 1. 



305 


283, 284] Tramfinite Cardinals 

has some such property as that indicated — a property, that is to 
say, independent of the nature of its terms and of their order ; depend- 
ing, we might feel tempted to add, only upon their number. In fact, 
number is taken by Cantor to be a primitive idea, and it is, in his theory, 
a primitive proposition that every collection has a number. He is 
therefore consistent in giving a specification of number which is not a 
formal definition. 

By means, however, of the principle of abstraction, we can give, as 
we saw in Part II, a formal definition of cardinal numbers. This 
method, in essentials, is given by Cantor immediately after the above 
infonnal definition. We have already seen that, if two classes be called 
similar when there is a one -one relation which couples every term of 
either with one and only one term of the other, then similarity is sym- 
metrical and transitive, and is reflexive for all classes. A one-one relation, 
it should be observed, can be defined without any reference to number, 
as follows : A relation is one-one when, if x has the relation to y , and x 
differs from x\ y from «/, then it follows that x does not have the 
relation to y , nor x to y . In this there is no reference to number ; and 
the definition of similarity also is therefore free from such reference. 
Since similarity is reflexive, transitive, and symmetrical, it can be 
analyzed into the product of a many-one relation and its converse, and 
indicates at least one common property of similar classes. This property, 
or, if there be several, a certain one of these properties, we may call the 
cardinal number of similar classes, and the many-one relation is that of 
a class to the number of its terms. In order to fix upon one definite 
entity as the cardinal number of a given class, we decide to identify the 
number of a class with the whole class of classes similar to the given 
class. This class, taken as a single entity, has, as the proof of the 
principle of abstraction shows, all the properties required of a cardinal 
number. The method, however, is philosophically subject to the doubt 
resulting from the contradiction set forth in Part I, Chapter x.* 

In this way we obtain a definition of the cardinal number of a class. 
Since similarity is reflexive for classes, every class has a cardinal number. 
It might be thought that this definition would only apply to finite 
classes, since, to prove that all terms of one class are correlated with all 
of another, complete enumeration might be thought necessary. This, 
however, is not the case, as may be seen at once by substituting any for 
aU — a word which is generally preferable where infinite classes are 
concerned. Two classes w, v are similar when there is some one-one 
relation R such that, if x be any tz, there is some term y of v such that 
xRy ; and if y' be any r, there is some term x f of u such that xRy. 
Here there is no need whatever of complete enumeration, but only of 
propositions concerning any u and any v. For example, the points on 
a given line are similar to the lines through a given point and meeting 

* See Appendix. 



308 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxvn 

The definition of powers of a number (a b ) is also effected logically 
(ib. § 4). For this purpose, Cantor first defines what he calls a covering 
( Belegung ) of one class N by another M. This is a law by which, to 
every element n of N is joined one and only one element m of M y but 
the same element m may be joined to many elements of N. That is, 
a Belegung is a many-one relation, whose domain includes N, and 
which correlates with the terms of N always terms of M. If a be the 
number of terms in A/, b the number in N, then the number of all such 
many-one relations is defined to be a b . It is easy to see that, for finite 
numbers, this definition agrees with the usual one. For transfinite 
numbers, indices have still the usual properties, i.e. 

a b a c = a b+e , a e \f — ( ab ) c , ( a b ) c — a bc . 

In the case where a = 2, a b is capable of a simpler definition, deduced 
from the above. If a = 2, L Z b will be the number of ways in which 
b terms can be related each to one of two terms. Now when those 
which are related to one of the two are given, the rest are related to 
the other. Hence it is enough, in each case, to specify the class of 
terms related to one of the two. Hence we get in each case a class 
chosen out of the b terms, and in all cases we get all such classes. 
Hence is the number of classes that can be formed out of b terms, 
or the number of combinations of b things any number at a time — a 
familiar theorem when b is finite, but still true when b is transfinite. 
Cantor lias a proof that % b is always greater than b — a proof which, 
however, leads to difficulties when b is the number of all classes, or, 
more generally, when there is some collection of b terms in which all the 
sets chosen out of the b terms are themselves single terms of b *. 

The definitions of multiplication given by Cantor and Vivanti re- 
quire that the number of factors in a product should be finite ; and 
this makes it necessary to give a new and independent definition of 
powers, if the exponent is allowed to be infinite. Mr A. N. Whitehead f 
has given a definition of multiplication which is free from this restriction, 
and therefore allows powers to be defined in the ordinary way as pro- 
ducts. He has also found proofs of the formal laws when the number 
of summands, brackets, or factors is infinite. The definition of a product 
is as follows : Let A; be a class of classes, no two of which have any terms 
in common. Choose out, in every possible way, one term and only one 
from each of the classes composing k . By doing this in all possible 
ways, we get a class of classes, called the multiplicative class of k. The 
number of terms in this class is defined to be the product of the numbers 
of terms in the various classes which are members of k. Where k has 
a finite number of members, it is easy to see that this agrees with the 
usual definition. Let u,v,w be the members of k 9 and let them have 
respectively a, 7 terms. Then one term can be chosen out of u in 


* See Chapter xuii, infra. 


t American Journal of Mathematic », loc. cit. 



286, 287] Transfinite Cardinals 809 

a ways : for every way there are j3 ways of choosing one term out of v , 
and for every way of choosing one term out of u and one out of r, there 
are y ways of choosing one out of zc. Hence there are a/3 y ways of 
choosing one term out of each, when multiplication is understood in its 
usual sense. The multiplicative class is an important notion, by means of 
which transfinite cardinal Arithmetic can be carried a good deal further 
than Cantor has carried it. 

287. All the above definitions apply to finite and transfinite integers 
alike, and, as we see, the formal laws of Arithmetic still hold. Trans- 
finite integers differ from finite ones, however, both in the properties of 
their relation to the classes of which they are the numbers, and also in 
regard to the properties of classes of the integers themselves. Classes of 
numbers have, in fact, very different properties according as the numbers 
are all finite or are in part at least transfinite. 

Among transfinite cardinals, some are particularly important, 
especially the number of finite numbers, and the number of the con- 
tinuum. The number of finite numbers, it is plain, is not itself a 
finite number ; for the class finite number is similar to the class even 
finite number , which is a part of itself. Or again the same conclusion 
may be proved by mathematical induction — a principle which also 
serves to define finite numbers, but which, being of a more ordinal 
nature, I shall not consider until the next chapter. The numl>er of 
finite numbers, then, is transfinite. This number Cantor denotes by 
the Hebrew Aleph with the suffix 0 ; for us it will be more convenient 
to denote it by Oo- Cantor proves that this is the least of all the 
transfinite cardinals. This results from the following theorems (loc. 
at. § 6) : 

(A) Every transfinite collection contains others as parts whose 
number is a 0 . 

( B ) Every transfinite collection which is part of one whose 
number is a 0 , also has the number o 0 . 

(C) No finite collection is similar to any proper part of itself. 

(/>) Every transfinite collection is similar to some proper part of 

itself*. 

From these theorems it follows that no transfinite number is less than 
the number of finite numbers. Collections which have this number are 
said to be denumerable, because it is always possible to count such 
collections, in the sense that, given any term of such a collection, there 
is some finite number n such that the given term is the nth. This 
is merely another way of saying that all the terms of a denumerable 
collection have a one-one correlation with the finite numbers, which again 
is equivalent to saying that the number of the collection is the same 
as that of the finite numbers. It is easy to see that the even numbers, 
the primes, the perfect squares, or any other class of finite numbers 

* Theorems C and D require that the finite should be defined by mathematical 
induction, or else they become tautologous. 



310 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxvn 

having no maximum, will form a denumerable series. For, arranging 
any such class in order of magnitude, there will be a finite number of 
terms, say //, before any given term, which will thus be the ( n 4- l)th 
term. What is more remarkable is, that all the rationals, and even 
all real roots of equations of a finite degree and with rational co- 
efficients (i.e. all algebraic numbers), form a denumerable series. And 
even an //-dimensional series of such terms, where n is a finite number, 
or the smallest transfinite ordinal, is still denumerable*. That the 
rational numbers are denumerable can be easily seen, by arranging them 
in the order in which those with smaller sum of numerator and denomi- 
nator precede those with larger sum, and of those with equal sums, thrive 
with the smaller numerators precede those with larger ones. Thus we 
get the series 

1, 1/2, 2, 1/3, 3, 1/4, 2/3, 3/2, 4, 1/5 ... 

This is a discrete series, with a beginning and no end ; every rational 
number will occur in this series, and will have a finite number of pre- 
decessors. In the other cases the proof is rather more difficult. 

AH denumerable series have the same cardinal number a 0 , however 
different they may appear. But it must not be supposed that there is 
no number greater than a 0 . On the contrary, there is an infinite scries 
of such n limbers f. The transfinite cardinals are asserted by Cantor to 
be well-ordered, that is, such that every one of them except the last of 
all (if there be a last) has an immediate successor, and so has every 
class of them which has any numbers at all after it. But they do not 
all have an immediate predecessor ; for example, a» itself has no imme- 
diate predecessor. For if it had one, this would have to be the last of 
the finite numbers; but we know that there is no last finite number. But 
Cantors grounds for his assertion that the cardinals are well-ordered seem 
insufficient, so that for the present this must remain an open question. 

288. Of the transfinite numbers other than a,,, the most important 
is the number of the continuum. Cantor has proved that this number 
is not c 0 +» and hopes to prove that it is a,§ — a hope which, though 
he has long cherished it, remains unfulfilled. He has shown that the 
number of the continuum is 2 a »|| — a most curious theorem ; but it 
must still remain doubtful whether this number is a,, though there 
are reasons which rendered this probable ^T. As to the definition of a l 

* t>ee Acta Mathematical u, pp. 300, H13, 320. 

t See Jahrexbericht (ter dcatxehen Mafhematiker- Vereiuigung I, 181)2; Rinixta dt 
Matemativa , JI, pp. 105-7. Cantor's assertion that there is no greatest transfinite 
cardinal is open to question, bee Chap, xliij, infra. 

I Acta Math. II, p. WMt $ lb. p. 404. a x is the number next after a 0 . 

|| Math. Anua/en , xi.vi, § 4, note. 

IT See Couturat, Jh> I'lnfini Mathrmatiqae, Paris, 1800, p. 655. The ground 
alleged by Cantor for identifying the second power with that of the continuum is, 
that every infinite linear collection of points lias either the first power, or that of the 
continuum, whence it would seem to follow that the power of the continuum must 
be the next after the first. (Math. Annalen , 23, p. 488 ; see also Acta Math, vii.) But 



287 - 289 ] Transfinite Cardinals 811 

and of the whole succession of transfinite cardinals, this is a matter 
which is l>etter postponed until we have discussed the transfinite ordinals. 
It must not be supposed that we can obtain a new transfinite cardinal 
by merely adding one to it, or even by adding any finite number or a 0 . 
On the contrary, such puny weapons cannot disturb the transfinite 
cardinals. It is known that in the case of a 0 and a certain class of trans- 
finite cardinals, a number is equal to its double ; also that in the case of 
Oo and a presumably different class of transfinite cardinals, a number is 
equal to its square. The sum of two numbers belonging to the former 
of these classes is equal to the greater of the two numbers. It is not 
known whether all transfinite cardinals belong to one or both of these 
classes*. 

289 . It may be asked : In what respect do the finite and transfinite 
cardinals together form a single series ? Is not the series of finite 
numbers complete in itself, without the possibility of extending its 
generating relation ? If we define the senes of integers by means of 
the generating relation of differing by one — the method which is 
most natural when the series is to be considered as a progression — 
then, it must be confessed, the finite integers form a complete series, 
and there is no possibility of adding terms to them. But if, as is 
appropriate in the theory of cardinals, we consider the series as arising 
by correlation with that of whole and part among classes of which the 
integers can be asserted, then we see that this relation does extend 
beyond finite numbers. There are an infinite number of infinite classes 
in which any given finite class is contained ; and thus, by correlation 
with these, the number of the given finite class precedes that of any one 
of the infinite classes. Whether tliere is any other sense in which all 
integers, finite and transfinite, form a single series, I leave undecided ; 
the above sense would be sufficient to show that there is no logical 
error in regarding them as a single series, if it were known that of 
any two cardinals one must be the greater. But it is now time to turn 
our attention to the transfinite ordinals. 

the inference seems somewhat precarious. Consider, for example, the following 
analogy : in a compact series, the stretch determined by two terms consists either of 
an infinite number of terms, or, when the two terms coincide;, of one term only, and 
never of a finite number of terms other than one. But finite stretches are presented 
by other types of series, e.g. progressions. 

The theorem that the number of the continuum is 2°o results very simply from the 
proposition of Chapter xxxvi, that infinite classes of finite integers form a continuous 
series, 'Hie number of all classes of finite integers is 2«a (ride, nupra), and the number of 
finite classes is « 0 . Hence the number of all infinite classes of finite integers is 2*0 for 
the subtraction of <?„ does not diminish any number greater than a 0 ; 2«« is therefore 
the number of the continuum. To prove that this number is it would therefore 
be sufficient to show that the number of infinite classes of finite integers is the same 
as the number of types of series that can he formed of all the finite integers; for the 
latter number, as we shall see in the next chapter, is aj . 

* Cf. Whitehead, loc. cit. pp. 392-4. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 


TRANSFINITE ORDINALS. i 

290. Thk transfinite ordinals are, if possible, even more interesting 
and remarkable than the transfinite cardinals. Unlike the latter, they 
do not obey the commutative law, and their arithmetic is therefore quite 
different from elementary arithmetic. For every transfinite cardinal, or 
at any rate for any one of a certain class, there is an infinite collection 
of transfinite ordinals, although the cardinal number of all ordinals is 
the same as or less than that of all cardinals. The ordinals which 
belong to series whose cardinal number is a 0 are called the second class 
of ordinals; those corresponding to a, are called the third class, and 
so on. The ordinal numbers are essentially classes of series, or better 
still, classes of generating relations of series ; they are defined, for the 
most part, by some relation to mathematical induction. The finite 
ordinals, also, may be conceived as types of series: for example, the 
ordinal number n may be taken to mean “ a serial relation of n terms 
or, in popular language, n terms in a row. This is an ordinal notion, 
distinct from “ nth,” and logically prior to it*. In this sense, n is the 
name of a class of serial relations. It is this sense, not that expressed 
by “nth,” which is generalized by Cantor so as to apply to infinite 
series. 

291. Let us begin with Cantor’s definition of the second class of 
ordinal numbersf. 

“ It is now to be shown,” he says, “ how we are led to the definitions 
of the new numbers, and in what way are obtained the natural sections, 
which I call clams of numbers , in the absolutely endless series of real 
integers.... The series (1) of positive real whole numbers 1, 2, 3, ... v,... 
arises from repeated positing and combination of units which are pre- 
supposed and regarded as equal ; the number vis the expression both for a 
certain finite amount ( Anzahl ) of such successive positings,and for the com- 
bination of the units posited into a whole. Thus the formation of finite 

* Cf. supra Part IV, Chap, xxix, §§ 231, 232. 
t MamichfatiigkeUskkrt, § 11, pp. 32, 33. 



313 


290 , 291 ] Transjinite Oi'dinals 

real whole numbers rests on the addition of a unit to a number which 
has already been formed ; I call this moment, which, as we shall see 
immediately, also plays an essential part in the formation of the higher 
integers, the first principle of formation . The amount (Anzahl) of 
possible numbers v of the class (1) is infinite, and there is no greatest 
among them. Thus however contradictory it would be to speak of 
a greatest nuipber of the class (1), there is yet nothing objectionable 
in imagining a new number, which we will call &>, which is to express 
that the whole collection (1) is given by its law in its natural order 
of succession. (In the same way as v expresses the combination of a 
certain finite amount of units into a whole.) It is even permissible to 
think of the newly created number as a limit, towards which the 
numbers v tend, if by this nothing else is understood but that o> is 
the first integer which follows all the numbers v> i.c. is to be called 
greater than each of the numbers v. Bv allowing further additions 
of units to follow the positing of the number o> we obtain, by the help 
of the first principle of formation, the further numbers 

o) + 1, w + 2, w + v 9 ; 

Since here again we come to no greatest number, we imagine a new one, 
which we may call 2<w, and which is to be the first after all previous 
numbers v and o> +■ v. 

“The logical function which has given us the two numbers &) and 2o> 
is evidently different from the first principle of formation ; I call it the 
second principle of formation of real integers, and define it more exactly 
as follows : If we have any determinate succession of defined real integers, 
among which there is no greatest number, by means of this second 
principle of formation a new number is created, which is regarded as 
the limit of those numbers, i.e. is defined as the next number greater 
than all of them." 

The two principles of formation will be made clearer by considering 
that an ordinal number is merely a type or class of series, or rather 
of their generating relations. Thus if we have any series which has 
no last term, every pari of such a series which can be defined as all 
the terms up to and including a certain term of the series will have 
a last term. But since the series itself has no last term, it is of a 
different type from any such part or segment of itself. Hence the 
ordinal number representing the series as a whole must be different 
from that representing any such segment of itself, and must be a 
number having no immediate predecessor, since the series has no last 
term. Thus co is simply the name of the class progression , or of the 
generating relations of series of this class. The second principle of 
formation, in short, is that by which we define a certain type of series 
having no last term. Considering the ordinals preceding any ordinal 
a which is obtained by the second principle as representing segments 



314 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxvm 

of a series represented by a, the ordinal a itself represents the limit 
of such segments; and as we saw before, the segments always have a 
limit (provided they have no maximum), even when the original series 
has none*. 

In order to define a class among transfinite ordinals (of which, as 
is evident, the succession is infinite), Cantor introduces what he calls 
a principle of limitation ( Hemmungitprmcip )f. According to this 
principle, the second class of ordinals is to consist only of those whose 
predecessors, from 1 upwards, form a series of the first power, i.e. a series 
whose cardinal number is a 0 , or one whose terms, in a suitable ordyr, 
have a one-one relation to the finite integers. It is then shown that 
the power, or cardinal number, of the second class of ordinals as a 
whole, is different from a 0 (p. 35), and is further the very next cardinal 
numljer after a 0 (p. 37). What is meant by the next cardinal number 
to a 0 results clearly from the following proposition (p. 38): “ If M be any 
well-defined collection of the power of the second class of numbers, 
and if any infinite portion M of M be taken, then either the collection 
M' can be considered as a simply infinite series, or it is possible to 
establish a unique and reciprocal correspondence between M and J/'.” 
That is to say, any part of a collection of the second power is either 
finite, or of the first power, or of the second ; and hence there is no 
power between the first and second. 

292. Before proceeding to the addition, multiplication, etc of 
ordinals, it will Ik 4 well to take the above propositions, as far as possible, 
out of their mathematical dress, and to state, in ordinary language, 
exactly what it is they mean. As for the ordinal &>, this is simply the 
name for the class of generating relations of progressions. We have 
seen how a progression is defined : it is a series which has a first term, 
and a term next after each term, and which olieys mathematical induc- 
tion. By mathematical induction itself we can show that every part 
of a progression, if it has a last term, has some finite ordinal number a, 
where n denotes the class of series consisting of n terms in order; while 
every part which has no last term is itself a progression ; also we can 
show (what is indeed obvious) that no finite ordinal will represent a 
progression. Now progressions are a perfectly definite class of series, 
and the principle of abstraction shows that there is some entity to 
which all of them have a relation which they have to nothing else — 
for all progressions are ordinally similar (i.e. have a one-one relation 

* On the segments of well-ordered series see Cantor's article in Math. Amtaleu, 
xux, § 13. It is important to observe that the ordinals above explained are 
analogous, in their genesis, to the real numbers considered as segments (vide ('hap. 
xxxiii, mpra). Here, as there, the existence of a> is not open to question when 
the segment-theory is adopted, whereas on any other theory the existence-theorem 
is indemonstrable and unplausible. 

+ Ma n n i rhfuJtiykeitsleh re, p. 34. 



291 - 293 ] Transjinite Ordinals 315 

such that earlier terms are correlated with earlier ones, and later with 
later), and ordinal similarity is symmetrical, transitive, and (among 
series) reflexive. This entity, to which the principle of abstraction 
points, may be taken to be the type or class of serial relations, since 
no series can belong to more than one type of series. The type to 
which progressions belong, then, is what Cantor calls a>. Mathematical 
induction, starting from any finite ordinal, can never reach ft>, since 
c» is not a member of the class of finite ordinals. Indeed, we may define 
the finite ordinals or cardinals — and where series are concerned, this 
seems the best definition — as those which, starting from 0 or 1, can be 
reached by mathematical induction. This principle, therefore, is not to 
be taken as an axiom or postulate, but as the definition of finitude. It 
is to be observed that, in virtue of the principle that every number has 
an immediate successor, we can prove that any assigned number, say, 
10,937, is finite — provided, of course, that the number assigned is a 
finite number. That is to say, every proposition concerning 10,937 
can be proved without the use of mathematical induction, which, as 
most of us can remember, was not mentioned in the Arithmetic of our 
childhood. There is therefore no kind of logical error in using the 
principle as a definition of the class of finite numbers, nor is there a 
shadow of a reason for supposing that the principle applies to all 
ordinal or all cardinal numbers. 

At this point, a word to the philosophers may be in season. Most 
of them seem to suppose that the distinction between the finite and 
the infinite is one wdiose meaning is immediately evident, and they 
reason on the subject as though no precise definitions were needed. 
But the fact is, that the distinction of the finite from the infinite is 
by no means easy, and has only been brought to light by modem 
mathematicians. The numbers 0 and 1 are capable of logical definition, 
and it can be shown logically that every number has a successor. We 
can now define finite numbers either by the fact that mathematical 
induction can reach them, starting from 0 or 1 — in Dedekind’s language, 
that they form the chain of 0 or 1 — or by the fact that they are the 
numbers of collections such that no proper part of them has the same 
number as the whole. These two conditions may be easily shown to be 
equivalent. But they alone precisely distinguish the finite from the 
infinite, and any discussion of infinity which neglects them must be more 
or less frivolous. 

293. With regard to numbers of the second class other than o>, 
we may make the following remark. A collection of two or more 
terms is always, except possibly for some very large infinite collections, 
the field of more than one serial relation. Men may be arranged by 
their rank, age, wealth, or in alphabetical order: all these relations 
among men generate series, and each places mankind in a different 
order. But when a collection is finite, all possible orders give one and 



310 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxvm 

the same ordinal number, namely that corresponding to the cardinal 
number of the collection. That is to say, all series which can be formed 
of a certain finite number of terms are ordinally similar. With infinite 
series, this is quite different. An infinite collection of terms which is 
capable of different orders may belong, in its various orders, to quite 
* different types. We have already seen that the rationals, in one order, 
form a compact series with no beginning or end, while in another order 
they form a progression. These are series of entirely different types; 
and the same possibility extends to all infinite series. The ordinal type 
of a series is not changed by the interchange of two consecutive terins, 
nor, consequently, in virtue of mathematical induction, bv any fipite 
number of such interchanges. The general principle is, that the type 
of a series is not changed by what may be called a permutation. That 
is, if P be a serial relation by which the terms of u are ordered, R a 
one-one relation whose domain and whose converse domain are both u , 

then RPR is a serial relation of the same type as P ; and all serial 
relations whose field is w, and which are of the same type as P, are of 
the above form RPR. But by a rearrangement not reducible to a 
permutation, the type, in general, is changed. Consider, for example, 
the natural numbers, first in their natural order, and then in the order 
in which 2 comes first, then all the higher numbers in their natural 
order, and last of all 1. In the first order, the natural numbers form 
a progression ; in the second, they form a progression together with 
a last term. In the second form, mathematical induction no longer 
applies ; there are propositions which hold of 2, and of every subsequent 
finite number, but not of 1. The first form is the type of any funda- 
mental series of the kind we considered in Chapter xxxvi ; the second is 
the type of any such series together with its limit. Cantor has shown 
that every denumerable collection can be given an order which corre- 
sponds to any assigned ordinal number of the second class*. Hence 
the second class of ordinal numbers may be defined as all the types 
of well-ordered series in which any one given denumerable collection can 
be arranged by means of different generating relations. The possibility 
of such different types depends upon the fundamental property of infinite 
collections, that an infinite part of an infinite collection can always 
be found, which will have a one-one correlation with the whole. If 
the original collection was a series, the part, by this correlation, becomes 
a series ordinally similar to the whole : the remaining terms, if added 
after all the terms of the infinite part, will then make the whole 
ordinally different from what it was+. 

* Acta Math, ii, p. 304. 

+ Hie remaining' terms, if they be finite in number, will often not alter the type 
if added at the beginning; but if they be infinite, they will in general alter it even 
then. This will soon be more fully explained. 



317 


293 , 294 ] Transfinite Ordinals 

We may assimilate the theory of ordinals to that of cardinals as 
follows. Two relations will be said to be like when there is a one-one 
relation S, whose domain is the field of one of them (/*), and which 
is such that the other relation is SPS. If P be a well-ordered relation, 
i.e. one which generates a well-ordered series, the class of relations like 
P may be defined as the ordinal number of P . Thus ordinal numbers 
result from likeness among relations as cardinals from similarity among 
classes. 

294 . We can now understand the rules for the addition and multi- 
plication of transfinite ordinals. Both operations obey the associative, 
but not the commutative law. The distributive law is true, in general, 
only in the form 7 (a -I- /9) = 7 a 4 7 $, 

where a 4/3, a, /3 are multipliers*. That addition does not obey the 
commutative law may be easily seen. Take for example <0 4 1 and 
1 4 < 0 . The first denotes a progression followed by a single term : 
this is the type presented by a progression and its limit, which is 
different from a simple progression. Hence w + l is a different ordinal 
from a). But 1 4 co denotes a progression preceded by a single term, 
and this is again a progression. Hence 1 4 « = g>, but l+o> does not 
equal cu4lt- The numbers of the second class are, in fact, of two 
kinds, ( 1 ) those which have an immediate predecessor, ( 2 ) those which 
have none. Numbers such as <w, w . 2, <w.3,...cw 2 , o) 3 ...cD h> ... have no 
immediate predecessor. If any of these numbers be added to a finite 
number, the same transfinite number reappears ; but if a finite number 
be added to any of these numbers, we get a new number. The numbers 
with no predecessor represent series which have no end, while those 
which have a predecessor represent series which have an end. It is 
plain that terms added at the beginning of a series with no end leave it 
endless; but the addition of a terminating series after an endless one pro- 
duces a terminating series, and therefore a new type of order. Thus there 
is nothing mysterious about these rules of addition, which simply express 
the type of series resulting from the combination of two given series. 

Hence it is easy to obtain the rules of subtraction If a is less than 
) 8 , the equation a + £ = 

has always one and only one solution in f, which we may represent by 
— a. This gives the type of series that must be added after a to 
produce £. But the equation 

£ + a = /9 

* Man nichfaltigkeit&lehre, p. 39; a 4/3 will be the type of a series consisting of 
two parts, namely a part of the type a followed by a part of the type $ ; ya will be 
the type of a series consisting of a series of the type a of series of the type y. Thus 
a series composed of two progressions is of the type o> . 2. 

t Math. Annalen, xlvi, § 8. 

I MannichfultigkeiUlehre, p. 39. 



318 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxvin 

will sometimes have no solution, and at other times an infinite number 
of solutions. Thus the equation 

f + w = 0) + 1 

has no solution at all : no number of terms added at the beginning of 
a progression will produce a progression together with a last term. In 
fact, in the equation £ + a = 0 9 if a represents an endless type, while 0 
represents a terminating type, it is sufficiently evident that terms added 
before a can never produce a terminating type, and therefore can never 
produce the type 0. On the other hand, if we consider the equation 

£ + &) = a). 2 

this will be satisfied by £ = to 4* n, where n is zero or any finite number. 
For n before the second &> will coalesce with this to form o>, and thus 
& + n + o) = a). 2. In this case, therefore, £ has an infinite number of 
values. In all such cases, however, the possible values of £ have a 
minimum, which is a sort of principal value of the difference between 0 
and a. Thus subtraction is of two kinds, according as we seek a 
number which, added to a, will give 0 , or a number to w’hich a may be 
added so as to give 0. In the first case, provided a is less than 0 , there 
is always a unique solution ; in the second case, there may be no 
solution, and there may be an infinite number of solutions. 

295. The multiplication of ordinals is defined as follows*. Let 
M and N be two series of the types a and 0. In N, in place of each 
element n 9 substitute a series M n of the type a ; and let S be the series 
formed of all the terms of all series M n , taken in the following order : 
(1) any two elements of S which belong to the same series M n are to 
preserve the order they had in M n ; two elements which belong to 
different series M n , M n > are to have the order which n and ri have in N. 
Then the type of S depends only upon a and 0 9 and is defined to be 
their product a0 , where a is the multiplicand, and 0 the multiplicator. 
It is easy to see that products do not always obey the commutative law. 
For example, 2 . o> is the type of series presented by 

^1) /li ^2 9 Jvi /si ••• fv i 

which is a progression, so that 2. a > = &>. But cd. 2 is the type 

#19 & § ... ... ; f\y fy fjy ... f v y • • . 

which is a combination of two progressions, but not a single progression. 
In the former series, there is only one term, e ly which has no immediate 
predecessor; in the latter there are two, e x and f. 

Of division, as of subtraction, two kinds must be distinguished If 
there are three ordinals a, 0 9 y, such that 0 = ay, then the equation 
0 = a£ has no other solution than £ = y, and we may therefore denote 

* Math . Annalen , xlvi, § 8. 
t Mannichfaitujkeitilehre, p. 40. 



294-296] Transjinite Ordinals 819 

7 by #/a* * * § . But the equation /9 = fa, if soluble at all, may have several 
or even an infinity of roots ; of which, however, one is always the 
smallest. This smallest root is denoted by £>//«• 

Multiplication of ordinals is the process of representing a series of 
series as a single series, each series being taken as a whole, and preserving 
its place in the series of series. Division, on the other hand, is the 
process of splitting up a single series into a series of series, without 
altering the order of its terms. Both these processes have some im- 
portance in connection with dimensions. Division, as is plain, is only 
possible with some types of series ; those with which it is not possible 
may be called primes. The theory of primes is interesting, but it is 
not necessary for us to go into it f. 

296. Every rational integral or exponential function of oi is a 
number of the second class, even when such numbers as <w w , etc^ 
occur J. But it must not be supposed that all types of denumerable 
series are capable of such a form. For example, the type 77 , which 
represents the rationales in order of magnitude§, is wholly incapable of 
expression in terms of to. Such a type is not called by Cantor an 
ordinal number. The term ordinal number is reserved for well-ordered 
series, i.e. such as have the following two properties || : 

I. There is in the series F a first term. 

II. If F* is a part of /\ and if F possesses one or more terms which 

come after all the terms of F\ then there is a term f of 
F which immediately follows F\ so that there is no term of 
F before f* and after all terms of F'. 

All possible functions of to and finite ordinals only, to the exclusion of 
other types such as that of the rationals, represent well-ordered series, 
though the converse does not hold. In every well-ordered series, there 
is a term next after any given term, except the last term if there be 
one ; and provided the series is infinite, it always contains parts which 
are progressions. A term which comes next after a progression has 
no immediate predecessor, and the type of the segment formed of its 
predecessors is of what is called the second species. The other terms 
have immediate predecessors, and the types of the segments formed of 
their predecessors are said to be of the first species. 

* Cantor has changed his notation in regard to multiplication: formerly, in a./ 3, 
a was the multi pi icator, and the multiplicand; now, the opposite order is 
adopted. In following older works, except in actual quotations, I have altered the 
order to that now adopted. 

t See Mannickfaltigkeitfdehre, p. 40. 

I On the exponential function, see Math. Annalen, xux, §§ 18-20. 

§ Math. Annalen , xlvi, § 9. 

|| Math. Annalen , xlix, § 12. The definition may be replaced by the following, 
which is equivalent to it: a series is well-ordered if every class contained in the 
series (except of course the null-class) has a first term. 



320 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxviii 

297. The consideration of series which are not well-ordered is im- 
portant, though the results have far less affinity to Arithmetic than in 
the rase of well-ordered series. Thus the type rj is not expressible as a 
function of c o, since all functions of to represent series with a first term, 
whereas tj has no first term, and all functions of to represent series in 
which every term has an immediate successor, which again is not the 
case with i). Even the series of negative and positive integers and zero 
cannot be expressed in terms of &>, since this series has no beginning. 
Cantor defines for this purpose a serial type which may be taken as 
the type of a regression ( ib . §7). The definition of a progression, as 
we have seen, is relative to some one-one aliorelative P f. When P 

generates a progression, this progression with respect to P is a regression 
with respect to P, and its type, considered as generated by P, is denoted 
by *o). Thus the whole series of negative and positive integers is 
of the type *co 4- &>. Such a series can be divided anywhere into two 
progressions, generated by converse relations ; but in regard to one 
relation, it is not reducible to any combination of progressions. Such a 
series is completely defined, by the methods of Part IV, as follows : P is 

a one-one aliorelative ; the field of P is identical with that of P ; the 
disjunctive relation “some finite positive power of P v * is transitive and 
asymmetrical ; and the series consists of all terms having this relation 
or its converse to a given term together with the given term. The class 
of series corresponding to any transfinite ordinal type may always be 
thus defined by the methods of Part IV ; but where a type cannot be 
expressed as a function of o> or or both, it will usually be necessary, 
if we are to define our type completely, either to bring in a reference to 
some other relation, in regard to which the terms of our series form a pro- 
gression, or to specify the behaviour of our series with respect to limits. 
Thus the type of the series of rationals is not defined by specifying that 
it is compact, and has no beginning or end ; this definition applies also, 
for example, to what Cantor calls the semi -continuum, i.e. the continuum 
with its ends cut off. W e must add that the rationals are denumerable, 
i.e . that, with respect to another relation, they form a progression. 
I doubt whether, in this case, the behaviour of the rationals with 
regard to limits can be used for definition. Their chief characteristics 
in this respect are : (1) that they are condensed in themselves, i.e. every 
term of them is the limit of certain progressions and regressions ; 
(2) in any interval, a progression or a regression which has no limit is 
contained. But both these characteristics belong to the series of 
irrational numbers, i.e. to the series obtained by omitting all rationals 
from the series of real numbers ; yet this series is not denumerable. 

t An aliorelative is a relation which no term can have to itself. This term is due 
to Pierce. See Schroder, Algebra u. Logik der Relative , p. 131 . 



297-299] Tramjinitc Ordinal* 321 

Thus it would seem that we cannot define the type 17 , to which the 
rationals belong, without reference to two generating relations. The 
type 17 is that of endless compact series whose terms, with reference to 
another relation, form a progression. 

From the last remark, we see clearly the importance of the correlation 
of series, with which we began the discussions of Part V. For it is only 
by means of correlation that the type of the rationals, and hence the 
continuum, can be defined. Until we bring in some other relation than 
that by which the order of magnitude among rationals arises, there 
is nothing to distinguish the type of the rationals from that of the 
irrationals. 

298. The consideration of ordinals not expressible as functions of 
6 ) shows clearly that ordinals in general are to be considered — as I 
suggested at the beginning of this chapter — as classes or types of 
serial relations, and to this view Cantor himself now apparently adheres; 
for in the article in the Mathem at Ische Annalen , Vol. xlvi, he speaks of 
them always as types of order, not as numbers, and in the following 
article ( Math . Annalen , xi . ix , §12), he definitely restricts ordinal numbers 
to well-ordered series. In his earlier writings, he confined himself 
more to functions of <u, which bear many analogies to more familiar 
kinds of numbers. These are, in fact, types of order which may be 
presented by series of finite and transfinite cardinals which begin with 
some cardinal. But other types of order, as we have now seen, have 
very little resemblance to numbers. 

299. It is worth while to repeat the definitions of general notions 
involved in terms of what may be called relation -arithmetic*. If P, Qbe 
two relations such that there is a one-one relation S whose domain is the 

field of P and w hich is such that Q = SPS, then P and Q are said to be 
like. The class of relations like P, which I denote by \P, is called 
P’s relation-number. If the fields of P and Q have no common terms, 
P + Q is defined to be P or Q or the relation which holds between any 
term of the field of P and any term of the field of Q, and between no 
other terms. Thus P + Q is not equal to Q + P. Again \P + \Q is 
defined as \(P+Q). For the summation of an infinite number of 
relations, we require an aliorelative whose field is composed of relations 
whose fields are mutually exclusive. Let P be such a relation, p its 
field, so that p is a class of relations. Then 2^? is to denote either one 
of the relations of the class p or the relation of any term belonging 
to the field of some relation Q of the class p to a term belonging to the 
field of another relation R (of the class p) to which Q has the relation P. 
(If P be a serial relation, and p a class of serial relations, 2pp will be the 
generating relation of the sum of the various series generated by terms 
of p taken in the order generated by P.) We may define the sum 


* Cf. Part IV, Chap, xxix, § 231. 



322 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxviii 

of the relation-numbers of the various terms of p as the relation-number 
of ^*pp- If all the terms of p have the same relation -number, say a, 
and if @ be the relation-number of P, a x /3 will be defined to be the 
relation-number of 2/^. Proceeding in this way, it is easy to prove 
generally the three formal laws which hold of well-ordered series, 
namely : 

(« + £) + 7=a + (£ + 7) 

a (0 + 7 ) = a fi + 

( a &)y = a ($7)* \ 

The proofs are very closely analogous to those discovered by Mr White- 
head for cardinal numbers ( Arner . Journal of Math., Vol. xxiv); but 
they differ by the fact that no method has yet been discovered for 
defining an infinite product of relation-numbers, or even of ordinal 
numbers. 

300. It is to be observed that the merit of the above method is 
that it allows no doubt as to existence-theorems — a point in which 
Cantor’s work leaves something to be desired. As this is an important 
matter, and one in which philosophers are apt to be sceptical, I shall 
here repeat the argument in outline. It may be shown, to begin with, 
that no finite class embraces all terms : this results, with a little care, 
from the fact that, since 0 is a cardinal number, the number of numbers 
up to and including a finite number n is n -f 1. Further, if n be a 
finite number, n + 1 is a new finite number different from all its prede- 
cessors. Hence finite cardinals form a progression, and therefore the 
ordinal number co and the cardinal number a 0 exist (in the mathematical 
sense). Hence, by mere rearrangements of the series of finite cardinals, 
we obtain all ordinals of Cantor s second class. We may now define the 
ordinal number a>! as the class of serial relations such that, if u be a class 
contained in the field of one of them, to say that u has successors implies 
and is implied by saying that u has 0 ^ terms or a finite number of terms ; 
and it is easy to show that the series of ordinals of the first and second 
classes in order of magnitude is of this type. Hence the existence of o>j 
is proved; and ol y is defined to be the number of terms in a series 
whose generating relation is of the type . Hence we can advance to 
Q> a and a 9 and so on, and even to o) v and a*,, whose existence can be 
similarly proved : will be the type of generating relation of a series 

such that, if u be a class contained in the series, to say that u has 
successors is equivalent to saying that it is finite or has, for a suitable 
finite value of 71 , a* terms. This process gives us a one-one correlation 
of ordinals with cardinals : it is evident that, by extending the process, 
we can make each cardinal which can belong to a well-ordered series 
correspond to one and only one ordinal. Cantor assumes as an axiom that 
every class is the field of some well-ordered series, and deduces that all 
cardinals can be correlated with ordinals by the above method. This 



299 - 302 ] Transfinite Ordinals 323 

assumption seems to me unwarranted, especially in view of the fact that 
no one has yet succeeded in arranging a class of terms in a well- 
ordered series. We do not know that of any two different cardinal 
numbers one must be the greater, and it may be that 2*® is neither 
greater nor less than a! and a? and their successors, which may be called 
well-ordered cardinals because they apply to well-ordered classes. 

301. There is a difficulty as regards the type of the whole series of 
ordinal numl)ers. It is easy to prove that every segment of this series 
is well-ordered, and it is natural to suppose that the whole series is also 
well-ordered. If so, its type would have to be the greatest of all ordinal 
numbers, for the ordinals less than a given ordinal form, in order of 
magnitude, a series whose type is the given ordinal. But there cannot be 
a greatest ordinal number, because every ordinal is increased by the 
addition of 1. From this contradiction, M. Burali-Forti, who dis- 
covered it*, infers that of two different ordinals, as of two different 
cardinals, it is not necessary that one should be greater and the 
other less. In this, however, he consciously contradicts a theorem of 
Cantor’s which affirms the opposite f. I have examined this theorem 
with all possible care, and have failed to find any flaw in the proof J. 
But there is another premiss in M. Burali-Forti’s argument, which 
appears to me more capable of denial, and that is, that the series of all 
ordinal numbers is well-ordered. This does not follow from the fact 
that all its segments are well-ordered, and must, I think, be rejected, 
since, so far as I know, it is incapable of proof. In this way, it would 
seem, the contradiction in (juestion can be avoided. 

302. We may now return to the subject of the successive derivatives 
of a series, already briefly discussed in Chapter xxxvi. This forms one of 
the most interesting applications of those ordinals which are functions 
of a), and may even be used as an independent method of defining them. 
We have already seen how, from a series P, its first derivative is 
obtained §. The first derivative of P, which is denoted by P', is the 
class of its limiting points. P", the second derivative of P', consists of 
the limiting-points of P', and so on. Every infinite collection has 
at least one limiting-point : for example, o> is the limit of the finite 
ordinals. By induction we can define any derivative of finite order P v . 
If P v consists of a finite number of points, P v + l vanishes ; if this happens 
for any finite number v, P is said to be of the 1st genus and the vth 

* “l T na questione sui uumeri transfiniti,” Jlendicouti del nrro/o Mntematwo di 
Palermo , Vol. xi (1897). 

t Theorem n of § 13 of Cantor’s article in Math. Ainuifeu , Vol. xmx. 

I I have reproduced the proof in symbolic form, in which errors are more easily 
detected, in KdM, Vol. vm, Prop. 5.47 of my article. 

§ What follows is extracted from Acta Math . u, pp. 341-380. I shall assume for 
simplicity that all definable limits exist, i.e. that. a series has a limit whenever the 
corresponding segments have one. I have shown in Chapter xxxvi how to state results 
no as to avoid this assumption ; hut the necessary circumlocution i« tiresome. 



324 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxviii 

species. But it may happen that no P v vanishes, and in this case 
all finite derivatives may have common points. The points which all 
have in common form a collection which is defined as P". It is to he 
observed that P* is thus defined without requiring the definition of o>. 
A term x belongs to P" if, whatever finite integer v may be, x belongs 
to P v . It is to be observed that, though F may contain points not 
belonging to P, yet subsequent derivatives introduce no new points. 
This illustrates the creative nature of the method of limits, or rather of 
segments : when it is first applied, it may yield new terms, but later 
applications give no further terms. That is, there is an intrinsic differ- 
ence between a series which has been, or may have been, obtained as the 
derivative of some other series, and one not so obtainable. Every series 
which contains its first derivative is itself the derivative of an infinite 
number of other series*. The successive derivatives, like the segments 
determined by the various terms of a regression, form a series in which 
each term is part of each of its predecessors ; hence P", if it exists, is the 
lower limit of all the derivatives of finite order. From P w it is easy to go 
on to P" + v , P"' 2 , etc. Series can lie actually constructed in which any 
assigned derivative, finite or transfinite of the second class, is the first to 
vanish. When none of the finite derivatives vanishes, P is said to be of 
the second genus. It must not be inferred, however, that P is not 
denumerable. On the contrary, the first derivative of the rationals is 
the number-continuum, which is perfect, so that all its derivatives are 
identical with itself; yet the rationals, as we know, are denumerable. 
But when F vanishes, P is always denumerable, if v be finite or of 
the second class. 

The theory of derivatives is of great importance to the theory of 
real functions f, where it practically enables us to extend mathematical 
induction to any ordinal of the second class. But for philosophy, it 
seems unnecessary to say more of it than is contained in the above 
remarks and in those of Chapter xxxvi. Popularly speaking, the first 
derivative consists of all points in whose neighbourhood an infinite 
number of terms of the collection are heaped up ; and subsequent deriva- 
tives give, as it were, different degrees of concentration in any neigh- 
bourhood. Thus it is easy to see why derivatives are relevant to 
continuity : to be continuous, a collection must be as concentrated as 
passible in every neighbourhood containing any terms of the collection. 
But such popular modes of expression are incapable of the precision 
which belongs to Cantor’s terminology. 

* Formulaire de Mathematiques , Vol. n. Part iii, § 71, 4-8. 

+ See Dini, Thewie der Functioruni , Leipzig, 1892; esp. Chap, xm and 
Translator’s preface. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 


THE INFINITESIMAL CALCULUS. 

303. The Infinitesimal Calculus is the traditional name for the 
differential and integral calculus together, and as such I have retained 
it ; although, as we shall shortly see, there is no allusion to, or implica- 
tion of, the infinitesimal in any part of this branch of mathematics. 

The philosophical theory of the Calculus has been, ever since the 
subject was invented, in a somewhat disgraceful condition, leibniz 
himself— who, one would have supposed, should have been competent 
to give a correct account of his own invention— had ideas, upon this 
topic, which can only be described as extremely crude. He appears 
to have held that, if metaphysical subtleties are left aside, the 
Calculus is only approximate, but is justified practically by the fact 
that the errors to which it gives rise are less than those of observa- 
tion* * * § . When he was thinking of Dynamics, his belief in the actual 
infinitesimal hindered him from discovering that the Calculus rests 
on the doctrine of limits, and made him regard his dx and ily as 
neither zero, nor finite, nor mathematical fictions, but as really 
representing the units to which, in his philosophy, infinite division 
was supposed to leadf. And in his mathematical expositions of the 
subject, he avoided giving careful proofs, contenting himself with 
the enumeration of rules J. At other times, it is true, he definitely 
rejects infinitesimals as philosophically valid§; but he failed to show 
how, without the use of infinitesimals, the results obtained by means 
of the Calculus could yet be exact, and not approximate. In this 
respect, Newton is preferable to Iveibniz : his Lemmas || give the true 
foundation of the Calculus in the doctrine of limits, and, assuming the 
continuity of space and time in Cantor’s sense, they give valid proofs 

* Cf. Mathematical Work *, (ierhardt’s ed. iv, pp. 01-93; Phil. Work *, 
Gerhardt’s ed. u, p. 282. 

t See Math. Worku, Gerhardt’s ed. vi, pp. 2 35, 247, 252. 

{ See Math. Worku, Gerhardt’s ed., Vol. v, pp. 220 ff. 

§ E.g. Phil. Worku, Gerhardt’s ed., u, p. 305. Cf. Cassirer, Ijeihuix’ Sgotm 
(Marburg, 1902), pp. 200-7. 

|| Prinripia, Part I, Section i. 



326 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxix 

of its rules so far as spatio-temporal magnitudes are concerned. But 
Newton was, of course, entirely ignorant of the fact that his Lemmas 
depend upon the modem theory of continuity ; moreover, the appeal 
to time and change, which appears in the word fluxion, and to space, 
which appears in the Lemmas, was wholly unnecessary, and served 
merely to hide the fact that no definition of continuity had been 
given. Whether Leibniz avoided this error, seems highly doubtful ; 
it is at any rate certain that, in his first published account of the 
Calculus, he defined the differential coefficient by means of the tangent 
to a curve. And by his emphasis on the infinitesimal, he gave a wrong 
direction to speculation as to the Calculus, which misled all mathe- 
maticians before Weierstrass (with the exception, perhaps, of De 
Morgan), and all philosophers down to the present day. It is only 
in the last thirty or forty years that mathematicians have provided the 
requisite mathematical foundations for a philosophy of the Calculus; and 
these foundations, as is natural, are as yet little known among philo- 
sophers, except in France*. Philosophical works on the subject, such 
as Cohen's Princip dvr Infi n itesmialmethode and .seine Gcxchichtcf, are 
vitiated, as regards the constructive theory, bv an undue mysticism, 
inherited from Kant, and leading to such results as the identification of 
intensive magnitude with the extensive infinitesimal J. I shall examine 
in the next chapter the conception of the infinitesimal, which is essential 
to all philosophical theories of the Calculus hitherto propounded. For 
the present, I am only concerned to give, the constructive theory as it 
results from modem mathematics. 

304. The differential coefficient depends essentially upon the notion 
of a continuous function of a continuous variable. The notion to be 
defined is not purely ordinal ; on the contrary, it is applicable, in the 
first instance, only to series of numbers, and thence, by extension, to 
series in which distances or stretches are numerically measureable. But 
first of all we must define a continuous function. 

We have already seen (Chap, xxxii.) what is meant by a function of a 
variable, and what is meant by a continuous variable (Chap, xxxvi.). If 
the function is one-valued, and is only ordered by correlation with the 
variable, then, when the variable is continuous, there is no sense in asking 
whether the function is continuous ; for such a series by correlation is 
always ordinallv similar to its prototype. But when, as where the variable 
and the field of the function are both classes of numbers, the function 
has an order independent of correlation, it may or may not happen that 
the values of the function, in the order obtained by correlation, form a 
continuous series in the independent order. When they do so in any 
interval, the function is said to be continuous in that interval. The 

* See ( outurat, OeTlnfini Matluhnatique, passim. 

+ Berlin, 'Hie historical part of this work, it should l»e said, is adinirahle. 

I Op. ('it. p. lo. 



327 


303 , 804 ] The Infinitesimal Calculus 

precise definitions of continuous and discontinuous functions, where both 
x andyXtf) are numerical, are given by Dini* as follows. The inde- 
pendent variable x is considered to consist of the real numbers, or of all 
the real numbers in a certain interval ; f(x\ in the interval considered, 
is to lie one-valued, even at the end-points of the interval, and is to be 
also composed of real numbers. We then have the following definitions, 
the function being defined for the interval between a and £, and a being 
some real number in this interval. 

u ca ll f(x) continuous for x = a, or in the point a, in which it 
has the value f(a), if for every positive number <r, different from 0, 
but as small as we please, there exists a positive number e, different 
from 0, such that, for all values of $ which are numerically less than e, 
the difference f(a -f 8) —f(d) is numerically less than or. In other 
words, f(x) is continuous in the point x - a, where it has the value /*(«), 
if the limit of its values to the right and left of a is the same, and 
equal to ,/’(«). ” 

“ Again, % f\x) is discontinuous for x = a, if, for any t positive value 
of <r, there is no corresponding positive value of € such that, for all 
values of 8 which are numerically less than e, f(a + 8) — f(a) is always 
less than <r ; in other words, J\x) is discontinuous for x — a , when the 
values f(a -f h) of f( x) to the right of a, and the values f(a — h) of ,f(x) 
to the left of «, the one and the other, have no determinate limits, or, if 
they have such, these are different on the two sides of a ; or, if they are 
the same, they differ from the value f(a), which the function has in the 
point 

These definitions of the continuity and discontinuity of a function, it 
must l)c confessed, are somewhat complicated ; but it seems impossible to 
introduce any simplification without loss of rigour. Roughly, we may 
say that a function is continuous in the neighbourhood of «, when its 
values as it approaches a approach the value f(a\ and have f{a) for 
their limit both to left and right. But the notion of the limit of a 
function is a somewhat more complicated notion than that of a limit in 
general, with which we have been hitherto concerned. A function of a 
perfectly general kind will have no limit as it approaches any given 
point. In order that it should have a limit as x approaches a from the 
left, it is necessary and sufficient that, if any number 6 be mentioned, 
any two values of f(x\ when x is sufficiently near to a, but less than a, 
will differ by less than e ; in popular language, the value of the function 
does not make any sudden jumps as x approaches a from the left. 
Under similar circumstances, f(x) will have a limit as it approaches a 
from the right. But these two limits, even when both exist, need not be 
equal either to each other, or to f(a ), the value of the function when 

* Op. tit. § :*0, pp. 50, 51. 

t The German (not the Italian) has every instead of any, but this is a slip. 



328 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxix 

x = a. The precise condition for a determinate finite limit may be thus 
stated * : 

“ In order that the values of y to the right or left of a finite number 
a (for instance to the right) should have a determinate and finite limit, 
it is necessary and sufficient that, for every arbitrarily small positive 
number a> there should be a positive number e y such that the difference 
y a + t — y a +s between the value y a + t of y for = « + and the value 
y a +ti which corresponds to the value a + S of oc, should be numerically 
less than <r, for every 8 which is greater than 0 and less than €.” 

It is possible, instead of thus defining the limit of a function, and 
then discussing whether it exists, to define generally a whole class of 
limits f. In this method, a number z belongs to the class of limits of y 
for #=«, if, within any interval containing a , however small, y will 
approach nearer to z than by any given difference. Thus, for example, 
sin 1/#, as x approaches zero, will take every value from — 1 to + 1 (both 
inclusive) in every finite interval containing zero, however small. Thus 
the interval from — 1 to + 1 forms, in this case, the class of limits 
for x = 0. This method has the advantage that the class of limits always 
exists. It is then easy to define the limit as the only member of the 
class of limits, in case this class should happen to have only one member. 
This method seems at once simpler and more general. 

305. Being now agreed as to the meaning of a continuous function, 
and of the limit of a function, we can attack the question of the 
derivative of a function, or differential coefficient. It was formerly 
supposed that all continuous functions could l)e differentiated, but this 
is now known to be erroneous. Some can be differentiated everywhere, 
others everywhere except in one point, others have everywhere a differen- 
tial on the right, but sometimes none on the left, others contain an 
infinite number of points, in any finite interval, in which they cannot 
be differentiated, though in an infinitely greater number of points they 
can be differentiated, others lastly — and these are properly the most 
general class — cannot be differentiated anywhere at all But the 
conditions under which a function may be differentiated, though they 
are of some importance to the philosophy of space and of motion, need 
not greatly concern us here ; and in any case, we must first know what a 
differential is. 

If f(x) be a function which is finite and continuous at the point .r, 
then it may happen that the fraction 

!/(•*+ s ) -/(•*■) )/s 

hfife a definite limit as S approaches to zero. If this does happen, the 

* Dini, op. cit. p. 88. 

t See Pea no, Riiixta di Mutematicu, n, pp. 77 7!); Fonnulnir r, Part in, § 78, 1-0. 

J See Dini, op. at. Chaps, x, xi, xii; Em:yktopi\die dtr math. Wi*xanwhnfUnt 9 
Hand h, Heft i (Leipzig, 1809), esp. pp. 20-22. 



329 


304-307] The Infinitesimal Calculus 

limit is denoted by f*(x\ and is called the derivative or differential of 
,/’(#) in the point x. If, that is to say, there be some number z such 
that, given any number e however small, if 8 be any number less than 
some number 77 , but positive, then jyja* ± 8 ) — ± 8 differs from 

z by less than c, then z is the derivative of f(x) in the point x. If the 
limit in question does not exist, then f(x) has no derivative at the point 
x. If f(x) be not continuous at this point, the limit does not exist ; 
if f(x) be continuous, the limit may or may not exist. 

306. The only point which it is important to notice at present is, 
that there is no implication of the infinitesimal in this definition. The 
number 8 is always finite, and in the definition of the limit there is 
nothing to imply the contrary. In fact, {/(x + 8) -f(x) ]/5, regarded 
as a function of 8 , is wholly indeterminate when 8 = 0. The limit of a 
function for a given value of the independent variable is, as we have 
seen, an entirely different notion from its value for the said value of the 
independent variable, and the two may or may not be the same number. 
In the present case, the limit may be definite, but the value for 8 = 0 can 
have no meaning. Thus it is the doctrine of limits that underlies the 
Calculus, and not any pretended use of the infinitesimal. This is the 
only point of philosophic importance in the present subject, and it is 
only to elicit this point that I have dragged the reader through so much 
mathematics. 

307. Before examining the infinitesimal on its own account, it 
remains to define the definite integral, and to show that this, too, does 
not involve the infinitesimal. The indefinite integral, which is the 
mere converse of the differential, is of no importance to us ; but the 
definite integral has an independent definition, which must be briefly 
examined. 

Just as the derivative of a function is the limit of a fraction, so the 
definite integral is the limit of a sum*. The definite integral may be 
defined as follows: Let f(x) be a function which is one-valued and 
finite in the interval a to /8 (both inclusive). Divide this interval into 
any n portions by means of the (n- 1 ) points x l9 x 2 , ... x n „ 19 and denote 
by 8 „ 8 „ ... 8 „ the n intervals x x — a, x x — # a , ... — x n ~ x . In each of 

these intervals, 8 ,, take any one of the values, say which f(x) 

assumes in this interval, and multiply this value by the interval 8 *. 

Now form the sum 2 f(£*) 8 g . This sum will always be finite. If 
1 

now', as n increases, this sum tends to one definite limit, however /*(&) 

* The definition of the definite integral differs little in different modem works. 
Cp. Dini, op. cit. §§ 178-181; Jordan, Couth d' Analyte, Vol. 1 (Paris, 1898), Chap. 1 , 
§§ 41-58; Encyklopftdie der nutihenuitiHchen W iHaentcJia ften , 11 , A. 2, § 81. 'Hie 
, definition as the limit of a sum is more consonant with Leibniz's views than that as 
the inverse of a derivative, but was banished by Bernoulli and Euler, and only 
brought back by Cauchy. See references in the last-mentioned place. 



330 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xxxix 

may be chosen in its interval, and however the intervals be chosen (pro- 
vided only that all are less than any assigned number for sufficiently 
great values of n ) — then this one limit is called the definite integral 
of /(.r) from a to ft. If there is no such limit, f(x) is not integrable 
from a to ft. 

308. As in the case of the derivative, there is only one important 
remark to make about this definition. The definite integral involves 
neither the infinite nor the infinitesimal, and is itself not a sum, but 
only and strictly the limit of a sum. All the terms which occur in the 
sum whose limit is the definite integral are finite, and the sum itself 
is finite. If we were to suppose the limit actually attained, it is tr^e, 
the number of intervals would be infinite, and the magnitude of each 
would be infinitesimal ; but in this case, the sum becomes meaningless. 
Thus the sum must not be regarded as actually attaining its limit. But 
this is a respect in which series in general agree. Any series which 
always ascends or always descends and has no last term cannot reach its 
limit ; other infinite series may have a term equal to their limit, but if 
so, this is a mere accident. The general rule is, that the limit does not 
belong to the series which it limits ; and in the definition of the deriva- 
tive and the definite integral we have merely another instance of this fact. 
The so-called infinitesimal calculus, therefore, has nothing to do with 
the infinitesimal, and has only indirectly to do with the infinite— its 
connection with the infinite being, that it involves limits, and only 
infinite series have limits. 

The above definitions, since they involve multiplication and division, 
are essentially arithmetical. Unlike the definitions of limits and con- 
tinuity, they cannot be rendered purely ordinal. But it is evident that 
they may be at once extended to any numerically measurable magnitudes, 
and therefore to all series in which stretches or distances can be measured. 
Since spaces, times, and motions are included under this head, the Cal- 
culus is applicable to Geometry and Dynamics. As to the axioms 
involved in the assumption that geometrical and dynamical functions 
can be differentiated and integrated, I shall have something to say at a 
later stage. For the present, it is time to make a critical examination of 
the infinitesimal on its own account. 



CHAPTER XL. 


THE INFINITESIMAL AND THE IMPROPER INFINITE. 

309. Until recent times, it was universally believed that continuity, 
the derivative, and the definite integral, all involved actual infinitesimals, 
i.e. that even if the definitions of these notions could be formally freed 
from explicit mention of the infinitesimal, yet, where the definitions 
applied, the actual infinitesimal must always be found. This belief is 
now generally abandoned. The definitions which have been given in 
previous chapters do not in any way imply the infinitesimal, and this 
notion appears to have become mathematically useless. In the present 
chapter, I shall first give a definition of the infinitesimal, and then 
examine the cases where this notion arises. I shall end by a critical 
discussion of the belief that continuity implies the infinitesimal. 

The infinitesimal has, in general, been very vaguely defined. It has 
been regarded as a number or magnitude which, though not zero, is less 
than any finite number or magnitude. It has been the dx or dy of the 
Calculus, the time during which a ball thrown vertically upwards is at 
rest at the highest point of its course, the distance between a point on 
a line and the next point, etc., etc. But none of these notions are at 
all precise. The dx and dy , as we saw in the last chapter, are nothing 
at all : dyjdx is the limit of a fraction whose numerator and denominator 
are finite, but is not itself a fraction at all. The time during which a 
ball is at rest at its highest point is a very complex notion, involving 
the whole philosophic theory of motion: in Part VII we shall find, 
when this theory has been developed, that there is no such time. The 
distance between consecutive points presupposes that there are con- 
secutive points— a view which there is every reason to deny. And so 
with most instances— they afford no precise definition of what is meant 
by the infinitesimal. 

310. There is, so far as I know, only one precise definition, which 
renders the infinitesimal a purely relative notion, correlative to some- 
thing arbitrarily assumed to be finite. When, instead, we regard what 
had been taken to be infinitesimal as finite, the correlative notion is 
what Cantor calls the improper infinite ( Uneigentlkh - Unendliche*). The 



332 


Infinity and Continuity [chap. XL 

definition of the relation in question is obtained by denying the axiom 
of Archimedes, just as the transfinite was obtained by denying mathe- 
matical induction. If P, Q be any two numbers, or any two measurable 
magnitudes, they are said to be finite with respect to each other when, 
if P be the lesser, there exists a finite integer n such that nP is greater 
than Q. The existence of such an integer constitutes the axiom of 
Archimedes and the definition of relative finitude. It will be observed 
that it presupposes the definition of absolute finitude among numbers — 
a definition which, as we have seen, depends upon two points, (1) the 
connection of 1 with the logical notion of simplicity, or of 0 v^th 
the logical notion of the null-class; (2) the principle of mathematilpal 
induction. The notion of relative finitude is plainly distinct from that 
of absolute finitude. The latter applies only to numbers, classes and 
divisibilities, whereas the former applies to any kind of measurable 
magnitude. Any two numbers, classes, or divisibilities, which are both 
absolutely finite are also relatively finite ; but the converse does not 
hold. For example, o) and oj . 2, an inch and a foot, a day and a year, 
are relatively finite pairs, though all three consist of terms which are 
absolutely infinite. 

The definition of the infinitesimal and the improper infinite is then 
as follows. If P, Q be two numbers, or two measurable magnitudes of 
the same kind, and if, n being any finite integer whatever, nP is always 
less than Q, then P is infinitesimal with respect to Q, and Q is infinite 
with respect to P. With regard to numbers, these relative terms are 
not required ; for if, in the case supposed, P is absolutely finite, then Q 
is absolutely infinite; while if it were possible for Q to be absolutely 
finite, P would be absolutely infinitesimal — a case, however, which we 
shall see reason to regal'd as impossible. Hence I shall assume in future 
that P and Q are not numbers, but are magnitudes of a kind of which 
some, at least, arc numerically measurable. It should be observed that, 
as regards magnitudes, the axiom of Archimedes is the only way of 
defining, not only the infinitesimal, but the infinite also. Of a magni- 
tude not numerically measurable, there is nothing to be said except that 
it is greater than some of its kind, and less than others ; but from such 
propositions infinity cannot be obtained. Even if there be a magnitude 
greater than all others of its kind, there is no reason for regarding it as 
infinite. Finitude and infinity are essentially numerical notions, and 
it is onlv by relation to numbers that these terms can be applied to 
other entities. 

311. The next question to be discussed is, What instances of in- 
finitesimals are to be found ? Although there are far fewer instances 
than was formerly supposed, there are yet some that are important. To 
begin with, if we have been right in regarding divisibility as a magni- 
tude, it is plain that the divisibility of any whole containing a finite 
number of simple parts is infinitesimal as compared with one containing 



310, 31 lj The Infinitesimal and the Improper Infinite 333 

an infinite number. The number of parts being taken as the measure, 
every infinite whole will be greater than n times every finite whole, 
whatever finite number n may be. This is therefore a perfectly clear 
instance. But it must not be supposed that the ratio of the divisibilities 
of two wholes, of which one at least is transfinite, can be measured by 
the ratio of the cardinal numbers of their simple parts. There are two 
reasons why this cannot be done. The first is, that two transfinite , 
cardinals do not have any relation strictly analogous to ratio ; indeed, 
the definition of ratio is effected by means of mathematical induction. 
The relation of two transfinite cardinals a, y expressed by the equation 
a/8 = 7 bears a certain resemblance to integral ratios, and a/3 = y& may 
be used to define other ratios. But ratios so defined are not very similar 
to finite ratios. The other reason why infinite divisibilities must not be 
measured by transfinite numbers is, that the whole must always have 
more divisibility than the part (provided the remaining part is not 
relatively infinitesimal), though it may have the same transfinite number. 
In short, divisibilities, like ordinals, are equal, so long as the wholes are 
finite, when and only when the cardinal numbers of the wholes are the 
same ; but the notion of magnitude of divisibility is distinct from that 
of cardinal number, and separates itself visibly as soon as we come to 
infinite wholes. 

Two infinite wholes may be such that one is infinitely less divisible 
than the other. Consider, for example, the length of a finite straight 
line and the area of the square upon that straight line ; or the length 
of a finite straight line and the length of the whole straight line of 
which it forms part (except in finite spaces) ; or an area and a volume ; 
or the rational numbers and the real numbers ; or the collection of 
points oh a finite part of a line obtainable by von Staudt\s quadrilateral 
construction, and the total collection of points on the said finite part*. 
All these are magnitudes of one and the same kind, namely divisibilities, 
and all are infinite divisibilities ; but they are of many different orders. 
The points on a limited portion of a line obtainable by the quadrilateral 
construction form a collection which is infinitesimal with respect to the 
said portion ; this portion is ordinally infinitesimal f with respect to any 
bounded area ; any bounded area is ordinally infinitesimal with respect to 
any bounded volume ; and any bounded volume (except in finite spaces) is 
ordinally infinitesimal with respect to all space. In all these cases, the 
word infinitesimal is used strictly according to the above definition, 
obtained from the axiom of Archimedes. What makes these various 
infinitesimals somewhat unimportant, from a mathematical standpoint, is, 
that measurement essentially depends upon the axiom of Archimedes, and 
cannot, in general, be extended by means of transfinite numbers, for the 
reasons which have just been explained. Hence two divisibilities, of 


* See Part VI, Chap. xlv. 


t See Part VI, Chap, xlvii, ,‘197. 



334 


Infinity and Continuity [chap. XL 

which one is infinitesimal with respect to the other, are regarded usually 
as different kinds of magnitude ; and to regard them as of the same kind 
gives no advantage save philosophic correctness. All of them, however, 
are strictly instances of infinitesimals, and the series of them well illus- 
trates the relativity of the term infinitesimal . 

An interesting method of comparing certain magnitudes, analogous 
to the divisibilities of any infinite collections of points, with those of 
continuous stretches is given by Stolz*, and a very similar but more 
general method is given by Can tor f. These methods are too mathe- 
matical to be fully explained here, but the gist of Stolz\s method may 
be briefly explained. Let a collection of points be contained in some 
finite interval a to ft. Divide the interval into any number n of parts, 
and divide each of these parts again into any number of parts, and so 
on ; and let the successive divisions be so effected that all parts become 
in time less than any assigned number 8. At each stage, add together 
all the parts that contain points of «/■'. At the mth stage, let the 
resulting sum be S m . Then subsequent divisions may diminish this sum, 
but cannot increase it. Hence as the number of divisions increases, 
S m must approach a limit /,. If a' is compact throughout the interval, 
we shall have L = b — a; if any finite derivative of jr vanishes, L = 0. 
I obviously bears an analogy to a definite integral ; but no conditions 
are required for the existence of L. But L cannot be identified with 
the divisibility ; for some compact series, e.g. that of rationals, are 
less divisible than others, e.g . the continuum, but give the same value 
of L. 

312. The case in which infinitesimals were formerly supposed to be 
peculiarly evident is that of compact series. In this case, however, it is 
possible to prove that there can be no infinitesimal segments}:, provided 
numerical measurement be possible at all — and if it be not possible, the 
infinitesimal, as we have seen, is not definable. In the first place, it is 
evident that the segment contained between two different terms is always 
infinitely divisible ; for since there is a term c between any two a and ft, 
there is another d between a and c, and so on. Thus no terminated 
segment can contain a finite number of terms. But segments defined by 
a class of terms may (as we saw in Chapter xxxiv) have no limiting term. 
In this case, however, provided the segment does not consist of a single 
term a, it will contain some other term ft, and therefore an infinite 
number of terms. Thus all segments are infinitely divisible. The next 
point is to define multiples of segments. Two terminated segments can 
be added by placing a segment equal to the one at the end of the other 
to form a new segment; and if the two were equal, the new one is said 

* Math . Anuulen, 23, “Ueber einen zu einer uueudlichen Puuktmenge gehorigen 
iirenzwerth.” 

+ Ih, “Ueber uneudliche lineare Punktmannigfaltigkeiteii,” No. 6. 

J See Peano, Itiinvta di Mutematica , Voi. n, pp. 58-62. 



311-313] The Infinitesimal and the Improper Infinite 335 

to be double of each of them. But if the two segments are not termi- 
nated, this process cannot be employed. Their sum, in this case, is 
defined by Professor Peano as the logical sum of all the segments obtained 
by adding two terminated segments contained respectively in the two 
segments to be added*. Having defined this sum, we can define any 
finite multiple of a segment. Hence we can define the class of terms 
contained in some finite multiple of our segment, i.r. the logical sum of 
all its finite multiples. If, with respect to all greater segments, our 
segment obeys the axiom of Archimedes, then this new class will contain 
all terms that come after the origin of our segment. But if our segment 
be infinitesimal with respect to any other segment, then the class in 
question will fail to contain some points of this other segment. In this 
case, it is shown that all transfinite multiples of our segment are equal 
to each other. Hence it follows that the class formed by the logical 
sum of all finite multiples of our segment, which may be called the 
infinite multiple of our segment, must be a non-terminated segment, 
for a terminated segment is always increased by being doubled. “ Each 
of these results,'” so Professor Peano concludes, “ is in contradiction with 
the usual notion of a segment. And from the fact that the infinitesimal 
segment cannot be rendered finite by means of any actually infinite 
multiplication, I conclude, with Cantor, that it cannot be an element 
in finite magnitudes ” (p. 62). But I think an even stronger conclusion 
is warranted. For we have seen that, in compact series, there is, cor- 
responding to every segment, a segment of segments, and that this is 
always terminated by its defining segment ; further that the numerical 
measurement of segments of segments is exactly the same as that of 
simple segments ; whence, by applying the above result to segments of 
segments, we obtain a definite contradiction, since none of them can be 
unterminated, and an infinitesimal one cannot be terminated. 

In the case of the rational or the real numbers, the complete know- 
ledge which we possess concerning them renders the non-existence of 
infinitesimals demonstrable. A rational number is the ratio of two 
finite integers, and any such ratio is finite. A real number other than 
zero is a segment of the series of rationals ; hence if'x be a real number 
other than zero, there is a class u 9 not null, of rationals such that, 
if y is a u , and z is less than z is an x 9 i.e. belongs to the segment 
which is x. Hence every real number other than zero is a class con- 
taining rationals, and all rationals are finite ; consequently every real 
number is finite. Consequently if it were possible, in any sense, to 
speak of infinitesimal numbers, it would have to be in some radically 
new sense. 

313. I come now to a very difficult question, on which 1 would 
gladly say nothing — 1 mean, the question of the orders of infinity and 
infinitesimality of functions. On this question the greatest authorities 

* Loc . cit, p. 01, No. 9. 



336 


Infinity and Continuity [chap. XL 

ait; divided: Du Bois Reymond, Stolz, and many others, maintaining 
that these form a special class of magnitudes, in which' actual infi- 
nitesimals occur, while Cantor holds strongly that the whole theory 
is erroneous*. To put the matter as simply as possible, consider a 
function f(x) whose limit, as x approaches zero, is zero. It may happen 
that, for some finite real number a, the ratio has a finite limit 

as .r approaches zero. There can be only one such number, but there 
may be none. Then a, if there is such a number, may be called the 
order to which f(x) becomes infinitesimal, or the order of smallness of 
f(x) as x approaches zero. But for some functions, e.g. 1 / log x 9 thefle 
is no such number a . If a be any finite real number, the limit of 
l/x*\ogx, as x approaches zero, is infinite. That is, when x is suffi- 
ciently small, \jx* log x is very large, and may be made larger than any 
assigned number by making x sufficiently small — and this whatever 
finite number a may be. Hence, to express the order of smallness of 
1/log x 9 it is necessary to invent a new infinitesimal number, which may 
be denoted by l/g. Similarly we shall need infinitely great numbers to 
express the order of smallness of (say) e~ 1,z as x approaches zero. And 
there is no end to the succession of these orders of smallness : that of 
1/log (log x) 9 for example, is infinitely smaller than that of l/log;r, 
and so on. Thus we have a whole hierarchy of magnitudes, of which 
all in any one class are infinitesimal with respect to all in any higher 
class, and of which one class only is formed of all the finite real 
numbers. 

In this development, Cantor finds a vicious circle ; and though the 
question is difficult, it would seem that Cantor is in the right. He 
objects (foe. cit.) that such magnitudes cannot be introduced unless we 
have reason to think that there are such magnitudes. The point is 
similar to that concerning limits; and Cantor maintains that, in the 
present case, definite contradictions may be proved concerning the 
supposed infinitesimals. If there were infinitesimal numbers j f then 
even for them we should have 

Lim x _ 0 1 / (log x . at) = 0 

since at must ultimately exceed And he shows that even continuous, 
differentiable, and uniformly growing functions may have an entirely 
ambiguous order of smallness or infinity : that, in fact, for some such 
functions, this order oscillates between infinite and infinitesimal values, 
according to the manner in which the limit is approached. Hence we 
may, I think, conclude that these infinitesimals are mathematical fictions. 
And this may be reinforced by the consideration that, if there were 
infinitesimal numbers, there would be infinitesimal segments of the 
number-continuum, which we have just seen to be impossible. 

* See Du Bois Reymond, AUgemeive Functionentheorie (1882), p. 270 ff. ; Stolz, 
Attgerueine Arithnictik, Part i (Leipzig, 1885), Section ix, Anhang; Cantor, Rivixtn 
Hi Matemntica, v, pp. 104-8. 



313 , 314 ] The Infinitesimal and the Improper Infinite 337 

314 . Thus to sum up what has been said concerning the in- 
finitesimal, we see, to begin with, that it is a relative term, and that, 
as regards magnitudes other than divisibilities, or divisibilities of wholes 
which are infinite in the absolute sense, it is not capable of being other 
than a relative term. But where it has an absolute meaning, there this 
meaning is indistinguishable from finitude. We saw that the infini- 
tesimal, though completely useless in mathematics, does occur in certain 
instances — for example, lengths of bounded straight lines are infinitesimal 
as compared to areas of polygons, and these again as compared to volumes 
of polyhedra. But such genuine cases of infinitesimals, as we saw, are 
always regarded by mathematics as magnitudes of another kind, because 
no numerical comparison is possible, even by means of transfinite numbers, 
between an area and a length, or a volume and an area. Numerical 
measurement, in fact, is wholly dependent upon the axiom of Archimedes, 
and cannot be extended as Cantor has extended numbers. And finally 
we saw that there are no infinitesimal segments in compact series, and — 
what is closely connected — that orders of smallness of functions are not 
to be regarded as genuine infinitesimals. The infinitesimal, therefore 
— so we may conclude — is a very restricted and mathematically very 
unimportant conception, of which infinity and continuity are alike 
independent. 



CHAPTER XLI. 


PHILOSOPHICAL ARGUMENTS CONCERNING 
THE INFINITESIMAL. 

316. Wk have now completed our summary review of what mathe- 
matics has to say concerning the continuous, the infinite, and the 
infinitesimal. And here, if no previous philosophers had treated of 
these topics, we might leave the discussion, and apply our doctrines 
to space and time. For I hold the paradoxical opinion that what 
can be mathematically demonstrated is true. As, however, almost all 
philosophers disagree with this opinion, and as many have written 
elaborate arguments in favour of views different from those above 
expounded, it will be necessary to examine controversially the principal 
types of opposing theories, and to defend, as far as possible, the points 
in which I differ from standard writers. For this purpose, the work of 
Cohen already referred to will be specially useful, not only because it deals 
explicitly with our present theme, but also because, largely owing to 
its historical excellence, certain very important mathematical errors, 
which it appears to me to contain, have led astray other philosophers 
who have not an acquaintance with modern mathematics at first hand*. 

316. In the above exposition, the differential appeared as a philo- 
sophically unimportant application of the doctrine of limits. Indeed, 
but for its traditional importance, it would scarcely have deserved even 
mention. And we saw that its definition nowhere involves the in- 
finitesimal. The dx and dy of a differential are nothing in themselves, 
and dyjdx is not a fraction. Hence, in modern works on the Calculus, 
the notation f (.r) has replaced dyjdx , since the latter form suggests 
erroneous notions. The notation f (x), it may be observed, is more 
similar to Newton’s ?/, and its similarity is due to the fact that, on 
this point, modern mathematics is more in harmony with Newton than 
with Leibniz. Leibniz employed the form dyjdx because he believed 
in infinitesimals ; Newton, on the other hand, definitely asserts that 
his fluxion is not a fraction. “ Those ultimate ratios,” he says, 44 with 

* For example, Mr Latta, in his article “On the Relations of the Philosophy of 
Spinoza and that of Leibniz,” Mind, N. S. No 31 



339 


315-318] Philosophical arguments , etc. 

which quantities vanish are not truly the ratios of ultimate quantities, 
but limits towards which the ratios of quantities decreasing without 
limit do always converge, and to which they approach nearer than by 
any given difference 

But when we turn to such works as Cohen's, we find the dx and 
the dy treated as separate entities, as real infinitesimals, as the intensively 
real elements of which the continuum is composed (pp. 14, 28, 144, 147). 
The view that the Calculus requires infinitesimals is apparently not 
thought open to question ; at any rate, no arguments whatever are 
brought up to support it. This view is certainly assumed as self-evident 
by most philosophers who discuss the Calculus. Let us see for ourselves 
what kind of grounds can be urged in its favour. 

317. Many arguments in favour of the view in question are 
derived by most writers from space and motion — arguments which 
Cohen to some extent countenances (pp. 34, 37), though he admits 
that the differential can be obtained from numbers alone, which however, 
following Kant, he regards as implying time (pp. 20, 21). Since the 
analysis of space and motion is still to come, I shall confine myself for 
the present to such arguments as can be derived from purely numerical 
instances. For the sake of definiteness, I shall as far as possible extract 
the opinions to be controverted from Cohen. 

318. Cohen begins (p. 1) by asserting that the problem of the 
infinitesimal is not purely logical : it belongs rather to Epistemology, 
which is distinguished, I imagine, by the fact that it depends upon the 
pure intuitions as well as the categories. This Kantian opinion is wholly 
opposed to the philosophy which underlies the present work ; but it 
would take us too far from our theme to discuss it here, and I mention 
it chiefly to explain the phraseology of the work we are examining. 
Cohen proceeds at once to reject the view that the infinitesimal calculus 
can be independently derived by mathematics from the method of limits. 
This method, he says (p. 1), “consists in the notion that the elementary 
conception of equality must be completed by the exact notion of the 
limit. Thus in the first place the conception of equality is presup- 
posed.... Again, in the second place, the method of limits presupposes 
the conception of magnitude.... But in the presupposed conception of 
magnitude the limiting magnitude is at the same time presupposed. 
The equality which is defined in the elementary doctrine of magnitude 
pays no attention to these limiting magnitudes. For it, magnitudes 
count as equal if and although their difference consists in a limiting 
magnitude. Hence the elementary conception of equality must be — 
this is the notion of the method of limits — not so much completed as 

* Principia, Bk i, Section i, Lemma xi, Scholium. The whole Scholium is 
highly important, though portions of it are less free from error than the passage 
quoted in the text. 



340 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xli 


corrected by the exact conception of the limit. Equality is to be 
regarded as an earlier stage of the limiting relation*.* 

319. I have quoted this passage in full, because its errors are 
typical of those to which non -mathematicians are liable in this question. 
In the first place, equality has no relevance to limits. I imagine that 
Cohen has in mind such cases as a circle and the inscribed polygon, 
where we cannot say that the circle is equal to any of the polygons, 
but only that it is their limit ; or, to take an arithmetical instance, 
a convergent series whose sum is n r or ^2. But in all such instances 
there is much that is irrelevant and adventitious, and there are maiiy 
unnecessary complications. The absolutely simplest instance of a limit 
is co considered as the limit of the ordinal numbers. There is here 
certainly no kind of equality. Yet in all cases where limits are defined 
by progressions — and these are the usual cases — we have a series of the 
type presented by the finite ordinals together with to. Consider, for 

example, the series 2 — - together with 2, the n being capable of all 

positive integral finite values. Here the series is of the same type as 
before, and here, as before, 2 is the limit of the series. But here — and 
this is what has misled Cohen — the difference between 2 and the 
successive terms of the series becomes less than any assigned magnitude, 
and thus we seem to have a sort of extended quality between 2 and the 

late terms of the series 2 — -. But let us examine this. In the first 

n 

place, it depends upon the fact that rationals are a series in which 
we have distances which are again rationals. But we know that distances 
are unnecessary to limits, and that stretches are equally effective. Now 

considering stretches, 2 is the limit of 2 — - because no rational comes 


between 2 and all terms of the series 2 — - — precisely the sense in which 


co is the limit of the finite integers. And it is only because 2 - - forms 

a progression, i.e. is similar to the series of finite integers, that we know 
its limit to be 2. The fact that the terms, as we advance, differ little 
from 2 , depends either upon our having a series in which there is 
distance, which is a fortuitous and irrelevant circumstance, or upon the 
fact that the successive stretches up to 2 may be made less than any 
assigned stretch up to 2 , which follows from the notion of a limit, 
but has nothing to do with equality. And whenever our series which 
is to have a limit is part of a series which is a function of o>, the stretch 
from any term to the limit is always infinite in the only sense in which 
such series have infinite stretches ; and in a very real sense the stretch 


* Or ratio: the German & GrmzverhiUtnias . 



318 - 321 ] Philosophical arguments, etc. 341 

grows no smaller as we approach the limit, for both the ordinal and 
the cardinal number of its terms remain constant. 

We have seen so fully already in what sense, and how far, magnitude 
is involved in limits, that it seems unnecessary to say much on this 
subject here. Magnitude is certainly not involved in the sense, which 
is undoubtedly that intended by Cohen, that the limit and the terms 
limited must be magnitudes. Every progression which forms part of 
a series which is a function of a>, and in which there are terms after 
the progression, has a limit, whatever may be the nature of the terms. 
Every endless series of segments of a compact series has a limit, what- 
ever may be the nature of the compact series. Now of course in all 
series we have magnitudes, namely the divisibilities of stretches ; but 
it is not of these that we find the limit. Even in the case of segments, 
the limit is an actual segment, not the magnitude of a segment ; and 
what is relevant is only that the segments are classes, not that they 
are quantities. But the distinction of quantities and magnitudes is, of 
course, wholly foreign to Cohen’s order of ideas. 

320. But we now come to a greater error. The conception of 
magnitude, Cohen says, which is presupposed in limits, in turn pre- 
supposes limiting magnitudes. By limiting magnitudes, as appears 
from the context, he means infinitesimals, the ultimate differences, 
1 suppose, between the terms of a series and its limit. What he means 
seems to be, that the kinds of magnitude which lead to limits are 
compact series, and that, in compact series, we must have infinitesimals. 
Every point in this opinion is mistaken. Limits, we have just seen, 
need not be limits of magnitudes ; segments of a compact series, as we 
saw in the preceding chapter, cannot be infinitesimal ; and limits do not 
in any way imply that the series in which they occur are compact. 
These points have been so fully proved already that it is unnecessary 
to dwell upon them. 

321. But the crowning mistake is the supposition that limits intro- 
duce a new meaning of equality. Among magnitudes, equality, as we 
saw in Part III, has an absolutely rigid and unique meaning : it applies 
only to quantities, and means that they have the mmc magnitude. 
There is no question of approximation here : what is meant is simply 
absolute logical identity of magnitude. Among numbers (which Cohen 
probably regards as magnitudes), there is no such thing as equality. 
There is identity, and there is the relation which is usually expressed by 
the sign of equality, as in the equation 2x3 = 6. This relation 
had puzzled those who endeavoured to philosophize about Arithmetic, 
until it was explained by Professor Peano*. When one term of the 
equation is a single number, while the other is an expression composed 
of two or more numbers, the equation expresses the fact that the class 


* See e.g. Jtiv . di Mat. vn, p. &*>■. 



342 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xli 

defined by the expression contains only one term, which is the single 
number on the other side of the equation. This definition again is 
absolutely rigid : there is nothing whatever approximate in it, and it is 
incapable of any modification by infinitesimals. I imagine that what 
Cohen means may be expressed as follows. In forming a differential 
coefficient, we consider two numbers x and x + dx, and two others y and 
y + dy . In elementary Arithmetic, x and x + dx would count as equal, 
but not in the Calculus. There are, in fact, two ways of defining 
equality. Two terms may be said to be equal when their ratio is unity, 
or when their difference is zero. But when we allow real infinitesimals 
dx , x and x-\- dx will have the ratio unity, but will not have zero fbr 
their difference, since dx is different from absolute zero. This view, 
which I suggest as equivalent to Cohen’s, depends upon a misunder- 
standing of limits and the Calculus. There are in the Calculus no such 
magnitudes as dx and dy. There are finite differences Ax and A y, but 
no view, however elementary, will make x equal to x -j- Ax. There are 
ratios of finite differences, A y\Ax, and in cases where the derivative of 
y exists, there is one real number to which Ay/Ax can be made to 
approach as near as we like by diminishing Ax and Ay. This single 
real number we choose to denote by dyjdx ; but it is not a fraction, and 
dx and dy are nothing but typographical parts of one symbol. There is 
no correction whatever of the notion of equality by the doctrine of 
limits; the only new element introduced is the consideration of infinite 
classes of terms chosen out of a series. 

322. As regards the nature of the infinitesimal, we are told (p. 15) 
that the differential, or the inextensive, is to be identified with the 
intensive, and the differential is regarded as the embodiment of Kant's 
category of reality. This view (in so far as it is independent of Kant) 
is quoted with approval from Leibniz ; but to me, 1 must confess, it 
seems destitute of all justification. It is to be observed that dx and dy, 
if we allow that they are entities at all, are not to be identified with 
single terms of our series, nor yet with differences between consecutive 
terms, but must be always stretches containing an infinite number 
of terms, or distances corresponding to such stretches. Here a dis- 
tinction must be made between series of numbers and series in which we 
have only measurable distances or stretches. The latter is the case of 
space and time. Here dx and dy are not points or instants, which alone 
would be truly inextensive; they are primarily numbers, and hence 
must correspond to infinitesimal stretches or distances — for it would be 
preposterous to assign a numerical ratio to two points, or — as in the 
case of velocity — to a point and an instant. But dx and dy cannot 
represent the distances of consecutive points, nor yet the stretch formed 
by two consecutive points. Against this we have, in the first place, the 
general ground that our series must be regarded as compact, which 
precludes the idea of consecutive terms. To evade this, if we are 



343 


321, 322] Philosophical arguments , etc. 

dealing with a series in which there are only stretches, not distances, would 
be impossible : for to say that there are always an infinite number of 
intermediate points except when the stretch consists of a finite number 
of terms would be a mere tautology. But when there is distance, it 
might be said that the distance of two terms may be finite or in- 
finitesimal, and that, as regards infinitesimal distances, the stretch is not 
compact, but consists of a finite number of terms. This being allowed 
for the moment, our dx and dy may be made to be the distances of 
consecutive points, or else the stretches composed of consecutive points. 
But now the distance of consecutive points, supposing for example that 
both are on one straight line, would seem to be a constant, which would 
give dy/dx — ±1. We cannot suppose, in cases where x and y are both 
continuous, and the function y is one-valued, as the Calculus requires, 
that x and x + dx are consecutive, but not y and y + dy; for every 
value of y will be con-elated with one and only one value of x> and vice 
versa ; thus y cannot skip any supposed intermediate values between 
y and y + dy. Hence, given the values of x and y , even supposing the 
distances of consecutive terms to differ from place to place, the value 
of dy/dx will be determinate ; and any other function y which, for 
some value of x , is equal to y, will, for that value, have an equal 
derivative, which is an absurd conclusion. And leaving these mathe- 
matical arguments, it is evident, from the fact that dy and dx are to 
have a numerical ratio, that if they be intensive magnitudes, as is 
suggested, they must be numerically measurable ones: but how this 
measurement is effected, it is certainly not easy to see. This point may 
be made clearer by confining ourselves to the fundamental case in which 
both x and y are numbers. If we regard x and x + dx as consecutive, 
we must suppose either that y and y+dy are consecutive, or that 
they are identical, or that there are a finite number of terms between 
them, or that there are an infinite number. If we take stretches to 
measure dx and dy, it will follow that dy/dx must be always zero, or 
integral, or infinite, which is absurd. It will even follow that, if 
y is not constant, dy/dx must be ± 1. Take for example y =;r 2 , where 
x and y are positive real numbers. As x passes from one number to the 
next, y must do so likewise; for to every value of y corresponds one 
of x , and y grows as x grows. Hence if y skipped the number next to 
any one of its values, it could never come back to pick it up ; but 
we know that every real number is among the values of y. Hence y 
and y + dy must be consecutive, and dy/dx = 1. If we measure by 
distances, not stretches, the distance dy must be fixed when y is given, 
and the distance dx when x is given. Now if x = 1, y =■ 1, dy/dx = 2 ; 
but, since x and y are the same number, dx and dy must be equal, since 
each is the distance to the next number : therefore dy/dx = 1, which 
is absurd. Similarly, if we take for y a decreasing function, we shall find 
dy/dx = —1. Hence the admission of consecutive numbers is fatal to the 



844 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xli 

Calculus; and since the Calculus must be maintained, the Calculus is 
fatal to consecutive numbers. 

323. The notion that there must be consecutive numbers is rein- 
forced by the idea of continuous change, which is embodied in calling 
x and y “variables.” Change in time is a topic which we shall have to 
discuss at a later stage, but which has, undoubtedly, greatly influenced 
the philosophy of the Calculus. People picture a variable to them- 
selves — often unconsciously — as successively assuming a series of values, 
as might happen in a dynamical problem. Thus they might say : 
How can x pass from x l to x. 2 , without passing through all intermediate 
values? And in this passage, must there not be a next value, which \it 
assumes on first leaving the value x x ? Everything is conceived on the 
analogy of motion, in which a point is supposed to pass through all 
intermediate positions in its path. Whether or not this view of motion 
is correct, I do not now decide : at any rate it is irrelevant where a 
fundamental point in the theory of continuous series is concerned, since 
time and the path of motion must both be continuous series, and the 
properties of such series must be decided before appealing to motion to 
confirm our views. For my part, to return to Cohen, I must confess, it 
seems evident that intensive magnitude is something wholly different 
from infinitesimal extensive magnitude: for the latter must always be 
smaller than finite extensive magnitudes, and must therefore be of the 
same kind with them ; while intensive magnitudes seem never in any 
sense smaller than any extensive magnitudes. Thus the metaphysical 
theory by which infinitesimals are to be rescued seems, both mathe- 
matically and philosophically, destitute of grounds in its favour. 

324. We cannot, then, agree with the following summary of 
Cohen’s theory (p. 28) : “ That I may be able to posit an element in 

and for itself is the desideratum , to which corresponds the instrument of 
thought reality. This instrument of thought must first be set up, in order 
to be able to enter into that combination with intuition, with the con - 
scicmsness of being given , which is completed in the principle of intensive 
magnitude. This presupposition of intensive reality is latent in all prin- 
ciples, and must therefore be made independent. This presupposition is 
the meaning of reality and the secret of the concept if the differential .” 
What we can agree to, and what, I believe, confusedly underlies the 
above statement, is, that every continuum must consist of elements 
or terms; but these, as we have just seen, will not fulfil the function of 
the dx and dy which occur in old-fashioned accounts of the Calculus. 
Nor can we agree that “this finite” ( i.e . that which is the object of 
physical science) “can be thought as a sum of those infinitesimal inten- 
sive realities, as- a definite integral ” (p. 144). The definite integral is 
not a sum of elements of a continuum, although there are such elements : 
for example, the length of a curve, as obtained by integration, is not the 
sum of its points, but strictly and only the limit of the lengths of 



845 


322 - 324 ] Philosophical arguments, etc. 

inscribed polygons. The only sense which can be given to the sum of 
the points of the curve is the logical class to which they all belong, i.e. 
the curve itself, not its length. All lengths are magnitudes of divisi- 
bility of stretches, and all stretches consist of an infinite number of 
points; and any two terminated stretches have a finite ratio to each 
other. There is no such thing as an infinitesimal stretch ; if there 
were, it would not be an element of the continuum ; the Calculus does 
not require it, and to suppose its existence leads to contradictions. And 
as for the notion that in every series there must be consecutive tenns, 
that was shown, in the last Chapter of Part III, to involve an illegiti- 
mate use of mathematical induction. Hence infinitesimals as explaining 
continuity must be regarded as unnecessary, erroneous, and self-con- 
tradictory. 



CHAPTER XLII. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE CONTINUUM. 

325. The word continuity has borne among philosophers, especially 
since the time of Hegel, a meaning totally unlike that given to it by 
Cantor. Thus Hegel says*: “Quantity, as w'e saw, has two sources: 
the exclusive unit, and the identification or equalization of these units. 
When we look, therefore, at its immediate relation to self, or at the 
characteristic of selfsameness made explicit by abstraction, quantity is 
Continuous magnitude; but when we look at the other characteristic, 
the One implied in it, it is Discrete magnitude.” When we remember 
that quantity and magnitude, in Hegel, both mean “ cardinal number,” 
we may conjecture that this assertion amounts to the following : “ Many 
terms, considered as having a cardinal number, must all be members 
of one class; in so far as they are each merely an instance of the 
class-concept, they are indistinguishable one from another, and in this 
aspect the whole which they compose is called continuous ; but in order 
to their maniness, they must be different instances of the class-concept, 
and in this aspect the whole which they compose is called discrete .” 
Now I am far from denying— indeed I strongly hold — that this opposi- 
tion of identity and diversity in a collection constitutes a fundamental 
problem of Logic— perhaps even the fundamental problem of philosophy. 
And being fundamental, it is certainly relevant to the study of the 
mathematical continuum as to everything else. But beyond this general 
connection, it has no special relation to the mathematical meaning of 
continuity, as may be seen at once from the fact that it has no reference 
whatever to order. In this chapter, it is the mathematical meaning that 
is to be discussed. I have quoted the philosophic meaning only in 
order to state definitely that this is not here in question; and since 
disputes about words are futile, I must ask philosophers to divest 
themselves, for the time, of their habitual associations with the word, 
and allow it no signification but that obtained from Cantor’s definition. 

326. In confining ourselves to the arithmetical continuum, we conflict 
in another way with common preconceptions. Of the arithmetical con- 

* Smaller Logic , § 100, Wallace’s Translation, p. 188. 



347 


325 - 327 ] The Philosophy of the Continuum 

tinuum, M. Poincare justly remarks*: “The continuum thus conceived 
is nothing but a collection of individuals arranged in a certain order, 
infinite in number, it is true, but external to each other. This is not 
the ordinary conception, in which there is supposed to be, between the 
elements of the continuum, a sort of intimate bond which makes a whole 
of them, in which the point is not prior to the line, but the line to the 
point. Of the famous formula, the continuum is unity in multiplicity, 
the multiplicity alone subsists, the unity has disappeared.” 

It has always been held to be an open question whether the 
continuum is composed of elements ; and even when it has been allowed 
to contain elements, it has been often alleged to be not cornjkxscd of 
these. This latter view was maintained even by so stout a supporter 
of elements in everything as Leibnizf. But all these views are only 
possible in regard to such continua as those of space and time. The 
arithmetical continuum is an object selected by definition, consisting of 
elements in virtue of the definition, and known to be embodied in 
at least one instance, namely the segments of the rational numbers. 
I shall maintain in Part VI that spaces afford other instances of the 
arithmetical continuum. The chief reason for the elaborate and para- 
doxical theories of space and time and their continuity, which have 
been constructed by philosophers, has been the supposed contradictions 
in a continuum composed of elements. The thesis of the present 
chapter is, that Cantor’s continuum is free from contradictions. This 
thesis, as is evident, must be firmly established, before we can allow 
the possibility that spatio-temporal continuity may be of Cantor’s kind. 
In this argument, I shall assume as proved the thesis of the preceding 
chapter, that the continuity to be discussed does not involve the 
admission of actual infinitesimals. 

327. In this capricious world, nothing is more capricious than 
posthumous fame. One of the most notable victims of posterity’s lack 
of judgment is the Eleatic Zeno. Having invented four arguments, 
all immeasurably subtle and profound, the grossness of subsequent 
philosophers pronounced him to be a mere ingenious juggler, and his 
arguments to be one and all sophisms. After two thousand years of 
continual refutation, these sophisms were reinstated, and made the 
foundation of a mathematical renaissance, by a German professor, who 
probably never dreamed of any connection between himself and Zeno. 
Weierstrass, by strictly banishing all infinitesimals, has at last shown 
that we live in an unchanging world, and that the arrow, at every 
moment of its flight, is truly at rest. The only point where Zeno 
probably erred was in inferring (if he did infer) that, because there 
is no change, therefore the world must be in the same state at one 
time as at another. This consequence by no means follows, and in 

# Revue de Mttaphyxique et de Morale , Vol. i, p. 26. 

+ See The Philomphy of Leibniz , by the present author. Chap. ix. 



348 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xlii 

this point the German professor is more constructive than ,the ingenious 
Greek. Weierstrass, being able to embody his opinions in mathematics, 
where familiarity with truth eliminates the vulgar prejudices of common 
sense, has been able to give to his propositions the respectable air of 
platitudes ; and if the result is less delightful to the lover of reason 
than Zeno’s bold defiance, it is at any rate more calculated to appease 
the mass of academic mankind. 

Zeno’s arguments are specially concerned with motion, and are not 
therefore, as they stand, relevant to our present purpose. But it is 
instructive to translate them, so far as possible, into arithmetical 
language *. 

328 . The first argument, that of dichotomy, asserts : “ There is 
no motion, for what moves must reach the middle of its course before 
it reaches the end.” That is to say, whatever motion we assume to 
have taken place, this presupposes another motion, and this in turn 
another, and so on ad infinitum. Hence there is an endless regress 
in the mere idea of any assigned motion. This argument can be put 
into an arithmetical form, but it appears then far less plausible. 
Consider a variable x which is capable of all real (or rational) values 
between two assigned limits, say 0 and 1. The class of its values is 
an infinite whole, whose parts are logically prior to it : for it has parts, 
and it cannot subsist if any of the parts are lacking. Thus the numbers 
from 0 to 1 presuppose those from 0 to 1/2, these presuppose the numbers 
from 0 to 1/4, and so on. Hence, it would seem, there is an infinite 
regress in the notion of any infinite whole; but without such infinite 
wholes, real numbers canriot be defined, and arithmetical continuity, 
which applies to an infinite series, breaks down. 

This argument may lie met in two ways, either of which, at first 
sight, might seem sufficient, but both of which are really necessary. 
First, we may distinguish two kinds of infinite regresses, of which one 
is harmless. Secondly, we may distinguish two kinds of whole, the 
collective and the distributive, and assert that, in the latter kind, 
parts of equal complexity with the whole are not logically prior to 
it. These two points must be separately explained. 

329 . An infinite regress may be of two kinds. In the objectionable 
kind, two or more propositions join to constitute the meaning of some 
proposition ; of these constituents, there is one at least whose meaning 
is similarly compounded ; and so on ad infinitum . This form of regress 
commonly result* from circular definitions. Such definitions may be 

* Not being a Greek scholar, I pretend to no first-hand authority as to what Zeno 
really did say or mean. The form of his four arguments which I shall employ is 
derived from the interesting article of M. Noel, “ Le mouvement et les arguments dc 
Zenon d’Elee,” Revue de Metuphytsique et de Morale , Vol. i, pp. 107-125. These 
arguments are in any case well worthy of consideration, and as they are, to me, 
merely a text for discussion, their historical correctness is of little importance. 



340 


327-330] The Philosophy of the Continuum 

expanded in a manner analogous to that in which continued fractions 
are developed from quadratic equations. But at every stage the term 
to be defined will reappear, and no definition will result. Take for 
example the following: “Two people are said to have the mrnr idea 
when they have ideas which are similar ; and ideas are similar when 
they contain an identical part.” If an idea may have a part which 
is not an idea, such a definition is not logically objectionable; but if 
part of an idea is an idea, then, in the second place where identity 
of ideas occurs, the definition must be substituted ; and so on. Thus 
wherever the meaning of a proposition is in question, an infinite regress 
is objectionable, since we never reach a proposition which has a definite 
meaning. But many infinite regresses are not of this form. If A be 
a proposition whose meaning is perfectly definite, and A implies /?, 
B implies C, and so on, we have an infinite regress of a quite un- 
objectionable kind. This depends upon the fact that implication is 
a synthetic relation, and that, although, if A \ye an aggregate of 
propositions, A implies any proposition which is part of A , it by no 
means follows that any proposition which A implies is part of A . Thus 
there is no logical necessity, as there was in the previous case, to 
complete the infinite regress before A acquires a meaning. If, then, 
it can be shown that the implication of the parts in the whole, when 
the whole is an infinite class of numbers, is of this latter kind, the 
regress suggested by Zeno’s argument of dichotomy will have lost 
its sting. 

330. In order to show that this is the case, we must distinguish 
wholes which are defined extensionally, i.e. by enumerating their terms, 
from such as are defined intensionally, i.e. as the class of terms having 
some given relation to some given term, or, more simply, as a class 
of terms. (For a class of terms, when it forms a whole, is merely all 
terms having the class-relation to a class-concept*.) Now an extensional 
whole — at least so far as human powers extend — is necessarily finite: 
we cannot enumerate more than a finite number of parts belonging 
to a whole, and if the number of parts be infinite, this must be known 
otherwise than by enumeration. But this is precisely what a class- 
concept effects : a whole whose parts are the terms of a class is completely 
defined when the class-concept is specified ; and any definite individual 
either belongs, or does not belong, to the class in question. An 
individual of the class is part of the whole extension of the class, and 
is logically prior to this extension taken collectively ; but the extension 
itself is definable without any reference to any specified individual, 
and subsists as a genuine entity even when the class contains no terms. 
And to say, of such a class, that it is infinite, is to say that, though 
it has terms, the number of these terms is not any finite number — 
a proposition which, again, may be established without the impossible 

* For precise statements, v. supra , Part I, Chaps, vi and x. 



860 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xlii 

process of enumerating all finite numbers. And this is precisely the 
case of the real numbers between 0 and 1. They form a definite class, 
whose meaning is known as soon as we know what is meant by real 
number , 0, 1, and Itetween. The particular members of the class, and 
the smaller classes contained in it, arc not logically prior to the class. 
Thus the infinite regress consists merely in the fact that every segment 
of real or rational numbers has parts which are again segments; but 
these parts are not logically prior to it, and the infinite regress is 
perfectly harmless. Thus the solution of the difficulty lies in the 
theory of denoting and the intensional definition of a class. With thi$ 
an answer is made to Zeno’s first argument as it appears in Arithmetic. » 

331 . The second of Zeno’s arguments is the most famous : it is 
the one which concerns Achilles and the tortoise. “The slower,” it 
says, “ will never be overtaken by the swifter, for the pursuer must 
first reach the point whence the fugitive is departed, so that the 
slower must always necessarily remain ahead.” When this argument is 
translated into arithmetical language, it is seen to be concerned with 
the one-one correlation of two infinite classes. If Achilles were to 
overtake the tortoise, then the course of the tortoise would be part 
of that of Achilles; but, since each is at each moment at some point 
of his course, simultaneity establishes a one-one correlation between 
the positions of Achilles and those of the tortoise. Now it follows 
from this that the tortoise, in any given time, visits just as many 
places as Achilles does; hence — so it is hoped we shall conclude — 
it is impossible that the tortoise’s path should be part of that of 
Achilles. This point is purely ordinal, and may be illustrated by 
Arithmetic. Consider, for example, l+£r and 2-h.r, and let x lie 
between 0 and 1, both inclusive. For each value of 1 + 2x there is 
one and only one value of 2 + x, and vice versa. Hence as x grows 
from 0 to 1, the number of values assumed by 1 + 2x will be the same 
as the number assumed by 2 + x. But 1 + started from 1 and ends 
at 3, while 2 + x started from 2 and ends at 3. Thus there should be 
half as many values of 2 -f x as of 1 + 2x. This very serious difficulty 
has been resolved, as we have seen, by Cantor ; but as it belongs rather 
to the philosophy of the infinite than to that of the continuum, I leave 
its further discussion to the next chapter. 

332 . The third argument is concerned with the arrow. M If every- 
thing is in rest or in motion in a space equal to itself, and if what moves 
is always in the instant, the arrow in its flight is immovable.” This 
has usually been thought so monstrous a paradox as scarcely to 
deserve serious discussion. To my mind, I must confess, it seems a very 
plain statement of a very elementary fact, and its neglect has, I think, 
caused the quagmire in which the philosophy of change has long been 
immersed. In Part VII, I shall set forth a theory of change which may 
be called static, since it allows the justice of Zeno’s remark. For the 



330-333] The Philosophy of the Continuum 351 

present^I wish to divest the remark of all reference to change. We shall 
then find that it is a very important and very widely applicable plati- 
tude, namely : “ Every possible value of a variable is a constant. 11 If x 
be a variable which can take all values from 0 to 1, all the values it 
can take are definite numbers, such as 1/2 or 1/3, which are all absolute 
constants. And here a few words may be inserted concerning variables. 
A variable is a fundamental concept of logic, as of daily life. Though 
it is always connected with some class, it is not the class, nor a particular 
member of the class, nor yet the whole class, but any member of the 
class. On the other hand, it is not the concept “ any member of the 
class, 11 but it is that (or those) which this concept denotes. On the 
logical difficulties of this conception, I need not now enlarge ; enough 
has been said on this subject in Tart I. The usual x in Algebra, ' 
for example, does not stand for a particular number, nor for all numbers, 
nor yet for the class number. This may be easily seen by considering 
some identity, say 

(.r + 1 ) 2 = .r 2 + £r + 1 . 

This certainly does not mean what it would become if, say, 391 were 
substituted for ,r, though it implies that the result of such a substitution 
would be a true proposition. Nor does it mean what results from 
substituting for x the class-concept number , for we cannot add 1 to this 
concept. For the same reason, x does not denote the concept any 
number : to this, too, 1 cannot be added. It denotes the disjunction 
formed by the various numbers ; or at least this view may be taken as 
roughly correct*. The values of x are then the terms of the disjunction ; 
and each of these is a constant. This simple logical fact seems to 
constitute the essence of Zeno's contention that the arrow is always 
at rest. 

333. But Zeno’s argument contains an element which is specially 
applicable to continua. In the case of motion, it denies that there 
is such a thing as a state of motion. In the general case of a continuous 
variable, it may be taken as denying actual infinitesimals. For in- 
finitesimals are an attempt to extend to the values of a variable the 
variability which belongs to it alone. When once it is firmly realized 
that all the values of a variable are constants, it becomes easy to see, by 
taking any two such values, that their difference is always finite, and 
hence that there are no infinitesimal differences. If x be a variable 
which may take all real values from 0 to 1, then, taking any two of 
these values, we see that their difference is finite, although x is a con- 
tinuous variable. It is true the difference might have been less than 
the one we chose ; but if it had been, it would still have been finite. 
The lower limit to possible differences is zero, but all possible differences 
are finite ; and in this there is no shadow of contradiction. This static 


* See Chap, vm, esp. § 1)3. 



352 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xlii 


theory of the variable is due to the mathematicians, and its absence 
in Zeno's day led him to suppose that continuous change was impossible 
without a state of change, which involves infinitesimals and the contra- 
diction of a body's being where it is not. 

334. The last of Zeno's arguments is that of the measure. This is 
closely analogous to one which I employed in the preceding chapter, 
against those who regard dx and dy as distances of consecutive terms. 
It is only applicable, as M. Noel points out ( lor . ext . p. 116), against 
those who hold to indivisibles among stretches, the previous arguments 
being held to have sufficiently refuted the partisans of infinite divisi- 
bility. We are now to suppose a set of discrete moments and discrete 
places, motion consisting in the fact that at one moment a body is in 
one of these discrete places, in another at another. 

Imagine three parallel lines composed of the abed 

points a, A, f, d; a , A', c\ d'; a", 6", c", d" 
respectively. Suppose the second line, in one abed 

instant, to move all its points to the left by one „ *„ 

place, while the third moves them all one place a c 

to the right. Then although the instant is 
indivisible, c\ which was over c", and is now abed 

over a", must have passed b" during the in- .... 

stant; hence the instant is divisible, contra a ' y c ’ $ 
hyp. This argument is virtually that by which .... 

I proved, in the preceding chapter, that, if there a" b" c" d" 

are consecutive terms, then dy/dx = ± 1 always; 
or rather, it is this argument together with an 

instance in which dyjdx — 2. It may be put thus : Let y, z be two 
functions of x, and let dyjdx = 1, dz/dx = — 1. Then (y—z)=2, which 


contradicts the principle that the value of every derivative must be ± 1. 
To the argument in Zeno's form, M. Evellin, who is an advocate of 
indivisible stretches, replies that d' and b' do not cross each other 
at all*. For if instants are indivisible — and this is the hypothesis — all 
we can say is, that at one instant d is over d\ in the next, c is over a". 
Nothing has happened between the instants, and to suppose that a" 
and A' have crossed is to beg the question by a covert appeal to the 
continuity of motion*. This reply is valid, I think, in the case of 
motion; both time and space may, without positive contradiction, be 
held to be discrete, by adhering strictly to distances in addition to 
stretches. Geometry, Kinematics, and Dynamics become false ; but 
there is no very good reason to think them true. In the case of 
Arithmetic, the matter is otherwise, since no empirical question of 
existence is involved. And in this case, as we see from the above 


* Revue de Metaphysique et de Morale , Vol. i, p. 386. 



353 


333 - 336 ] The Philosophy of the Continuum, 

argument concerning derivatives, Zeno's argument is absolutely sound. 
Numbers are entities whose nature can be established beyond question ; 
and among numbers, the various forms of continuity which occur 
cannot be denied without positive contradiction. For this reason the 
problem of continuity is better discussed in connection with numbers 
than in connection with space, time, or motion. 

335. We have now seen that Zeno's arguments, though they prove 
a very great deal, do not prove that the continuum, as we have become 
acquainted with it, contains any contradictions whatever. Since his 
day the attacks on the continuum have not, so far as I know, been 
conducted with any new or more powerful weapons. It only remains, 
therefore, to make a few general remarks. 

The notion to which Cantor gives the name of continuum may, of 
course, be called by any other name in or out of the dictionary, and it 
is open to every one to assert that he himself means something quite 
different by the continuum. But these verbal questions are purely 
frivolous. Cantor’s merit lies, not in meaning what other people mean, 
but in telling us what he means himself — an almost unique merit, where 
continuity is concerned. He has defined, accurately and generally, a 
purely ordinal notion, free, as we now see, from contradictions, and 
sufficient for all Analysis, Geometry, and Dynamics. This notion was 
presupposed in existing mathematics, though it was not known exactly 
what it was that was presupposed. And Cantor, by his almost un- 
exampled lucidity, has successfully analyzed the extremely complex 
nature of spatial series, by which, as we phall see in Part VI, he has 
rendered possible a revolution in the philosophy of space and motion. 
The salient points in the definition of the continuum are (1) the 
connection with the doctrine of limits, (2) the denial of infinitesimal 
segments. These two points being borne in mind, the whole philosophy 
of the subject becomes illuminated. 

336. The denial of infinitesimal segments resolves an antinomy 
which had long been an open scandal, I mean the antinomy that the 
continuum both does and does not consist of elements. We see now 
that both may be said, though in different senses. Every continuum 
is a series consisting of terms, and the terms, if not indivisible, at any 
rate are not divisible into new terms of the continuum. In this sense 
there are elements. But if we take consecutive terms together with 
their asymmetrical relation as constituting what may be called (though 
not in the sense of Part IV) an ordinal element, then, in this sense, our 
continuum has no elements. If we take a stretch to be essentially 
serial, so that it must consist of at least two terms, then there are no 
elementary stretches; and if our continuum be one in which there is 
distance, then, likewise there are no elementary distances. But in neither 
of these cases is there the slightest logical ground for elements. The 
demand for consecutive terms springs; as we saw in Part III, from an 



354 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xlh 

illegitimate use of mathematical induction. And as regards distance, 
small distances are no simpler than large ones, but all, as we saw in 
Part III, are alike simple. And large distances do not presuppose small 
ones : being intensive magnitudes, they may exist where there are no 
smaller ones at all. Thus the infinite regress from greater to smaller 
distances or stretches is of the harmless kind, and the lack of elements 
need not cause any logical inconvenience. Hence the antinomy is re- 
solved, and the continuum, so far at least as I am able to discover, is 
wholly free from contradictions. 

It only remains to inquire whether the same conclusion holds 
concerning the infinite— an inquiry with which this Fifth Part will 
come to a close. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE INFINITE. 

337. Ik our previous discussions of the infinite we have been 
compelled to go into so many mathematical {mints that there has 
been no adequate opportunity for purely philosophical treatment of 
the question. In the present chapter, I wish, leaving mathematics 
aside, to inquire whether any contradiction can be found in the notion 
of the infinite. 

Those who have objected to infinity have not, as a rule, thought 
it worth while to exhibit precise contradictions in it. To have done 
so is one of the great merits of Kant. Of the mathematical antinomies, 
the second, which is concerned, essentially, with the question whether or 
not the continuum has elements, was resolved in the preceding chapter, 
on the supposition that there may be an actual infinite— that is, it was 
reduced to the question of infinite number. The first antinomy is 
concerned with the infinite, but in an essentially temporal form; for 
Arithmetic, therefore, this antinomy is irrelevant, except on the Kantian 
view that numbers must be schematized in time. This view is supported 
by the argument that it takes time to count, and therefore without 
time we could not know the number of anything. By this argument 
we can prove that battles always happen near telegraph wires, because 
if they did not we should not hear of them. In fact, we can prove 
generally that we know what we know. But it remains conceivable that 
we don’t know what we don’t know ; and hence the necessity of time 
remains unproved. 

Of other philosophers, Zeno has already been examined in connection 
with the continuum ; and the paradox which underlies Achilles and the 
tortoise will be examined shortly. Plato’s Parmenides — which is perhaps 
the best collection of antinomies ever made— is scarcely relevant here, 
being concerned with difficulties more fundamental than any that have 
to do with infinity. And as for Hegel, he cries wolf so often that when 
he gives the alarm of a contradiction we finally cease to be disturbed. 
Leibniz, as we have seen, gives as a contradiction the one-one correlation 
of whole and part, which underlies the Achilles. This is, in fact, the 



356 


Infinity and Continuity [ chap , xlhi 

only point on which most arguments against infinity turn,. In what 
follows I shall put the arguments in a form adapted to our present 
mathematical knowledge ; and this will prevent me from quoting them 
from any classic opponents of infinity. 

338. I-<et us first recapitulate briefly the positive theory of the in- 
finite to which we have been led. Accepting as indefinable the notion 
projwsition and the notion constituent c if a proposition* we may denote 
by <f>(a) a proposition in which a is a constituent. We can then trans- 
form a into a variable x , and consider <}>(x), where <f>(x) is any proposition 
differing from <f>(a ), if at all, only by the fact that some other object 
appears in the place of a ; <j>(x) is what we called a propositional [function. 
It will happen, in general, that <f>(x) is true for some values of x ahd 
false for others. All the values of x , for which <j>(x) is true, form what 
we called the class defined by <f){x ) ; thus every propositional function 
defines a class, and the actual enumeration of the members of a class 
is not necessary for its definition. Again, without enumeration we can 
define the similarity of two classes : two classes u, v are similar when 
there is a one-one relation R such that 44 x is a u " always implies 44 there 
is a v to which x has the relation If,” and 44 y is a t’ r> always implies 
44 there is a u which has the relation R to y 7 s Further, R is a one-one 
relation if xRy , xRz together always imply that y is identical with z, 
and xRz, yRz together always imply that x is identical with y; and 
44 x is identical with y * is defined as meaning “every propositional 
function which holds of x also holds of y? We now define the cardinal 
number of a class u as the class of all classes which are similar to u ; 
and every class has a cardinal number, since 44 u is similar to r” is a 
propositional function of v, if v be variable. Moreover u itself is 
a member of its cardinal number, since every class is similar to itself. 
The al)ove definition of a cardinal number, it should be observed, is 
based upon the notion of propositional functions, and nowhere involves 
enumeration ; consequently there is no reason to suppose that there 
will be any difficulty as regards the numbers of classes whose terms 
cannot be counted in the usual elementary fashion. Classes can be 
divided into two kinds, according as they are or are not similar to 
proper parts of themselves. In the former case they are called infinite, 
in the latter finite . Again, the number of a class defined by a pro- 
positional function which is always false is called 0; 1 is defined as 
the number of a class u such that there is a term x, belonging to u , 
such that 44 y is a u and y differs from x" is always false; and if n 
be any number, n 4- 1 is defined as the number of a class u which has 
a member x m such that the propositional function 44 y is a u and y 
differs from x " defines a class whose number is n. If n is finite, 
n + 1 differs from n ; if not, not. In this way, starting from 0, we 
obtain a progression of numbers, since any number n leads to a new 
number wH-1. It is easily proved that all the numbers belonging to 



357 


337-339] The Philosophy of the Infinite 

the progression which starts from 1 and is generated in this way are 
different; that is to say, if n belongs to this progression, and m be 
any one of its predecessors, a class of n terms cannot have a one-one 
correlation with one of m terms. The progression so defined is the 
series of finite numbers. But there is no reason to think that all 
numbers can be so obtained ; indeed it is capable of formal proof 
that the number of the finite numbers themselves cannot be a term 
in the progression of finite numbers. A number not belonging to 
this progression is called infinite. The proof that n and w + 1 are 
different numbers proceeds from the fact that 0 and 1, or 1 and % 
are different numbers, by means of mathematical induction ; if n and 
n + 1 be not terms of this progression, the proof fails; and what is 
more, there is direct proof of the contrary. But since the previous 
proof depended upon mathematical induction, there is not the slightest 
reason why the theorem should extend to infinite numbers. Infinite 
numbers cannot be expressed, like finite ones, by the decimal system 
of notation, but they can be distinguished by the classes to which they 
apply. The finite numbers being all defined by the above progression, 
if a class u has terms, but not any finite number of terms, then it has an 
infinite number. This is the positive theory of infinity. 

339. That there are infinite classes is so evident that it will scarcely 
be denied. Since, however, it is capable of formal proof, it may be as 
well to prove it. A very simple proof is that suggested in the Parmenides , 
which is as follows. Let it be granted that there is a number 1. Then 
1 is, or has Being, and therefore there is Being. But 1 and Being are 
two : hence there is a number 2 ; and so on. Formally, we have proved 
that 1 is not the number of numbers ; we prove that n is the number 
of numbers from 1 to «, and that these numbers together with Being 
form a class which has a new finite number, so that n is not the number 
of finite numbers. Thus 1 is not the number of finite numbers; and 
if n — 1 is not the number of finite numbers, no more is n. Hence the 
finite numbers, by mathematical induction, are all contained in the class 
of things which are not the number of finite numbers. Since the relation 
of similarity is reflexive for classes, every class has a number ; therefore 
the class of finite numbers has a number which, not being finite, is 
infinite. A better proof, analogous to the above, is derived from the 
fact that, if n be any finite number, the number of numbers from 0 up 
to and including n is n + 1, whence it follows that n is not the number 
of numbers. Again, it may be proved directly, by the correlation of whole 
and part, that the number of propositions or concepts is infinite*. For 
of every term or concept there is an idea, different from that of which 
it is the idea, but again a term or concept. On the other hand, not 
every term or concept is an idea. There are tables, and ideas of tables ; 

* Cf. Bolzano, Pa ra dorian des UnendUchen , § 13 ; Dedekind, Was sind und was 
sollen die Zahlen ? No. Oft. 



358 Infinity and Continuity [chap. XLm 

numbers, and ideas of numbers ; and so on. Thus there is a one-one 
relation between terms and ideas, but ideas are only some among terms. 
Hence there is an infinite number of terms and of ideas*. 

340. The possibility that whole and part may have the same 
number of terms is, it must be confessed, shocking to common -sense. 
Zeno's Achilles ingeniously shows that the opposite view also has 
shocking consequences; for if whole and part cannot be correlated 
term for term, it does strictly follow that, if two material points 
travel along the same path, the one following the other, the one 
which is behind can never catch up : if it did, we should have, cor- 
relating simultaneous positions, a unique and reciprocal correspondence 
of all the terms of a whole with all the terms of a part. Common- 
sense, therefore, is here in a very sorry plight ; it must choose between 
the paradox of Zeno and the paradox of Cantor. I do not propose to 
help it, since I consider that, in the face of proofs, it ought to commit 
suicide in despair. But I will give the paradox of Cantor a form re- 
sembling that of Zeno. Tristram Shandy, as we know, took two years 
writing the history of the first two days of his life, and lamented that, 
at this rate, material would accumulate faster than he could deal with 
it, so that he could never come to an end. Now I maintain that, if 
he had lived for ever, and not wearied of his task, then, even if his 
life had continued as eventfully as it began, no part of his biography 
would have remained unwritten. This paradox, which, as I shall show, 
is strictly correlative to the Achilles, may be called for convenience the 
Tristram Shandy. 

In cases of this kind, no care is superfluous in rendering our arguments 
formal. I shall therefore set forth both the Achilles and the Tristram 
Shandy in strict logical shape. 

I. (1) For every position of the tortoise there is one and only one 
of Achilles ; for every position of Achilles there is one and only one of 
the tortoise. 

(2) Hence the series of positions occupied by Achilles has the 
same number of terms as the series of positions occupied by the tortoise. 

(3) A part has fewer terms than a whole in which it is contained 
and with which it is not coextensive. 

(4) Hence the series of positions occupied by the tortoise is not 
a proper part of the series of positions occupied by Achilles. 

II. (1) Tristram Shandy writes in a year the events of a day. 

(2) The series of days and years has no last term. 

(3) The events of the nth day are written in the wth year. 

(4) Any assigned day is the wth, for a suitable value of w. 

(5) Hence any assigned day will be written about. 

* It is not necessary to suppose that the ideas of all terms e .tint, or form part of 
some mind ; it is enough that they are entities. 



359 


339-341] The Philosophy of the Infinite 

(6) Hence no part of the biography will remain unwritten. 

(7) Since there is a one-one correlation between the times of 
happening and the times of writing, and the former are part of the 
latter, the whole and the part have the same number of terms. 

Let us express both these paradoxes as abstractly as possible. For 
this purpose, let u be a compact series of any kind, and let a: be a 
variable which can take all values in u after a certain value, which we 
will call 0. Let f(x) be a one-valued function of x y and x a one-valued 
function of f(x) ; also let all the values of f(x) belong to u. Then the 
arguments are the following. 

I. Let y*(0) be a term preceding 0 ; let f(x) grow as x grows, i.e. if 
xPx (where P is the generating relation), let f(x) Pf(x ). Further 
let f(x) take all values in u intermediate between any two values of f(x). 
If, then, for some value a of .r, such that 0 Pa, we have f(a) = a, then 
the series of values of f (j) will be all terms from f(0) to a, while that 
of x will be only the terms from 0 to a, which are a part of those from 
/*(0) to a. Thus to suppose /(a ) = a is to suppose a one-one correlation, 
term for term, of whole and part, which Zeno and common-sense pro- 
nounce impossible. 

II. Let /(^) be a function which is 0 when x is 0, and which grows 
uniformly as x grows, our series being one in which there is measurement. 
Then if x takes all values after 0, so does f(x) ; and if f(x) takes all 
such values, so does x. The class of values of the one is therefore 
identical with that of the other. But if at any time the value of x 
is greater than that of f ( x ), since f (x) grows at a uniform rate, x will 
always be greater than f (x). Hence for any assigned value of x , the 
class of values of f{x) from 0 to f(x) is a proper part of the values 
of x from 0 to x. Hence we might infer that all the values of f(x) 
were a proper part of all the values of x ; but this, as we have seen, is 
fallacious. 

These two paradoxes are correlative. Both, by reference to segments, 
may be stated in terms of limits. The Achilles proves that two variables 
in a continuous series, which approach equality from the same side, 
cannot ever have a common limit; the Tristram Shandy proves that 
two variables which start from a common term, and proceed in the 
same direction, but diverge more and more, may yet determine the same 
limiting class (which, however, is not necessarily a segment, because 
segments were defined as having terms beyond them). The Achilles 
assumes that whole and part cannot be similar, and deduces a paradox ; 
the other, starting from a platitude, deduces that whole and part may 
be similar. For common-sense, it must be confessed, this is a most 
unfortunate state of things. 

341. There is no doubt which is the correct course. The Achilles 
must be rejected, being directly contradicted by Arithmetic. The 
Tristram Shandy must be accepted, since it does not involve the axiom 



360 


Infinity and Continuity [chap. XLm 

that the whole cannot be similar to the part. This axiom, as we 
have seen, is essential to the proof of the Achilles ; and it is an axiom 
doubtless very agreeable to common-sense. But there is no evidence 
for the axiom except supposed self-evidence, and its admission leads to 
perfectly precise contradictions. The axiom is not only useless, but 
positively destructive, in mathematics, and against its rejection there 
is nothing to be set except prejudice. It is one of the chief merits of 
proofs that they instil a certain scepticism as to the result proved. As 
soon as it was found that the similarity of whole and part could be 
proved to be impossible for every finite whole*, it became not unplausib^e 
to suppose that for infinite wholes, where the impossibility could not bp 
proved, there was in fact no such impossibility. In fact, as regards 
the numbers dealt with in daily life — in engineering, astronomy, or 
accounts, even those of Rockefeller and the Chancellor of the Exchequer — 
the similarity of whole and part is impossible ; and hence the supposition 
that it is always impossible is easily explained. But the supposition rests 
on no better foundation than that formerly entertained by the inductive 
philosophers of Central Africa, that all men are black. 

342. It may be worth while, as helping to explain the difference 
between finite and infinite wholes, to point out that whole and part 
are terms capable of two definitions where the whole is finite, but of 
only one of these, at least practically, where the whole is infinite +. 
A finite whole may be taken collectively, as such and such individuals, 
Ay By Cy Dy E soy. A part of this whole may be obtained by 
enumerating some, but not all, of the terms composing the whole; 
and in this way a single individual is part of the whole. Neither the 
whole nor its parts need be taken as classes, but each may be defined 
by extension, i.e . by enumeration of individuals. On the other hand, 
the whole and the parts may be both defined by intension, i.e . by 
class-concepts. Thus we know without enumeration that Englishmen 
are part of Europeans ; for whoever is an Englishman is a European, 
but not vice versa. Though this might be established by enumeration, 
it need not be so established. When we come to infinite wholes, this 
twofold definition disappears, and we have only the definition by in- 
tension. The whole and the part must both be classes, and the definition 
of whole and part is effected by means of the notions of a variable 
and of logical implication. If a be a class-concept, an individual of a 
is a term having to a that specific relation which we call the class- 
relation. If now b be another class such that, for all values of x y u x 
is an a " implies “ x is a b ? then the extension of a (i.e. the variable **) 
is said to be part of the extension of b\. Here no enumeration of 
individuals is required, and the relation of whole and part has no longer 

* The finite being here defined by mathematical induction, to avoid tautology. 

+ Cf. § 330. 

J See Peano, Rivista di Matematica , vn, or Formulaire , Vol. 11 , Part I. 



361 


341-343] The Philosophy of the Infinite 

that simple meaning which it had where finite parts were concerned. 
To say now that a and b are similar, is to say that there exists some 
one-one relation R fulfilling the following conditions: if x be an a, 
there is a term y of the class h such that xRy ; if y be a 6, there is 
a term x of the class a such that x Ry . Although a is part of &, 
such a state of things cannot be proved impossible, for the impossibility 
could only be proved by enumeration, and there is no reason to sup- 
pose enumeration possible. The definition of whole and part without 
enumeration is the key to the whole mystery. The above definition, 
which is due to Professor Peano, is that which is naturally and necessarily 
applied to infinite wholes. For example, the primes are a proper part 
of the integers, but this cannot be proved by enumeration. It is de- 
duced from w if x be a prime, x is a number,’ 1 and “ if x be a number, 
it does not follow that x is a prime. 1 ’ That the class of primes should 
be similar to the class of numbers only seems impossible because we 
imagine whole and part defined by enumeration. As soon as we rid 
ourselves of this idea the supposed contradiction vanishes. 

343. It is very important to realize, as regards to or a®, that neither 
has a number immediately preceding it. This characteristic they share 
with all limits, for the limit of a series is never immediately preceded by 
any term of the series which it limits. But a> is in some sense logically 
prior to other limits, for the finite ordinal numbers together with 
present the formal type of a progression together with its limit. When 
it is forgotten that to has no immediate predecessor, all sorts of contra- 
dictions emerge. For suppose n to be the last number before to ; then 
n is a finite number, and the number of finite numbers is n + 1. In fact, 
to say that o> has no predecessor is merely to say that the finite numbers 
have no last term. Though o> is preceded by all finite numbers, it is 
not preceded immediately by any of them : there is none next to 
Cantors transfinite numbers have the peculiarity that, although there 
is one next after any assigned number, there is not always one next 
before. Thus there seem to be gaps in the series. We have the series 
1, 2 , 3 , ... i/, ... , which is infinite and has no last term. We have 
another series ai, &> + 1 , to + 2, ... <*> + v 9 ... which equally is infinite and 
has no last term. This second series comes wholly after the first, though 
there is no one term of the first which to immediately succeeds. This 
state of things may, however, be paralleled by very elementary series, 
such as the series whose general terms are 1 — 1/v and 2-1/v, where 
v may be any finite integer. The second series comes wholly after the 
first, and has a definite first term, namely 1. But there is no term 
of the first series which immediately precedes 1. What is necessary, 
in order that the second series should come after the first, is that there 
should be some series in which both are contained. If we call an ordinal 
part of a series any series which can be obtained by omitting some of 
the terms of our series without changing the order of the remaining 



362 Infinity and Continuity [chap, xliii 

terms, then the finite and transfinite ordinals all form one series, whose 
generating relation is that of ordinal whole and part among the series 
to which the various ordinals apply. If v be any finite ordinal, series of 
the type v are ordinal parts of progressions ; similarly every series of the 
type (u -f 1 contains a progression as an ordinal part. The relation 
ordinal part is transitive and asymmetrical, and thus the finite and 
transfinite ordinals all belong to one series. The existence of a> (in 
the mathematical sense of existence) is not open to question, since o> 
is the type of order presented by the natural numbers themselves. To 
deny (o would be to affirm that there is a last finite number — a view 
which, as we have seen, leads at once to definite contradictions. And 
when this is admitted, &> + 1 is the type of the series of ordinals in- 
cluding ft>, i.e. of the series whose terms are all series of integers from 1 
up to any finite number together with the whole series of integers. 
Hence all the infinite hierarchy of transfinite numbers easily follows. 

344. The usual objections to infinite numbers, and classes, and 
series, and the notion that the infinite as such is self-contradictory, 
may thus be dismissed as groundless. There remains, however, a very 
grave difficulty, connected with the contradiction discussed in Chapter x. 
This difficulty does not concern the infinite as such, but only certain 
very large infinite classes. Briefly, the difficulty may be stated as 
follows. Cantor has given a proof* that there can be no greatest 
cardinal number, and when this proof is examined, it is found to state 
that, if u be a class, the number of classes contained in u is greater than 
the number of terms of ?/, or (what is equivalent), if a be any number, 
2 a is greater than a. But there are certain classes concerning which it 
is easy to give an apparently valid proof that they have as many terms 
as possible. Such are the class of all terms, the class of all classes, or 
the class of all propositions. Thus it would seem as though Cantor's 
proof must contain some assumption which is not verified in the case 
of such classes. But when we apply the reasoning of his proof to the 
cases in question, we find ourselves met by definite contradictions, of 
which the one discussed in Chapter x is an example f. The difficulty 
arises whenever we try to deal with the class of all entities absolutely, 
or with any equally numerous class; but for the difficulty of such a 
view, one would be tempted to say that the conception of the totality 
of things, or of the whole universe of entities and existents, is in some 
way illegitimate and inherently contrary to logic. But it is undesirable 
to adopt so desperate a measure as long as hope remains of some less 
heroic solution. 

It may be observed, to begin with, that the class of numbers is not, 

* He has, as a matter of fact, offered two proofs, but we shall find that one of 
them is not cogent. 

t It was in this way that 1 discovered this contradiction ; a similar one is given 
at the end of Appendix B. 



363 


343-345] The Philosophy of the Infinite 

as might be supposed, one of those in regard to which difficulties occur. 
Among finite numbers, if n were the number of numbers, we should 
have to infer that n — 1 was the greatest of numbers, so that there 
would be no number n at all. But this is a peculiarity of finite numbers. 
The number of numbers up to and including oto is or*, but this is also 
the number of numbers up to and including a^, where # is any finite 
ordinal or any ordinal applicable to a denumerable well-ordered series. 
Thus the number of numbers up to and including a, where a is infinite, 
is usually less than a, and there is no reason to suppose that the number 
of all numbers is the greatest number. The number of numbers may be 
less than the greatest number, and no contradiction arises from the fact 
(if it be a fact) that the number of individuals is greater than the number 
of numbers. 

But although the class of numbers causes no difficulty, there are 
other classes with which it is very hard to deal. Let us first examine 
Cantor’s proofs that there is no greatest cardinal number, and then 
discuss the cases in which contradictions arise. 

345. In the first of Cantor’s proofs*, the argument depends upon 
the supposed fact that there is a one-one correspondence between the 
ordinals and the cardinals f. We saw that, when we consider the car- 
dinal number of the series of the type represented by any ordinal, an 
infinite number of ordinals correspond to one cardinal — for example, all 
ordinals of the second class, which form a non-denumerable collection, 
correspond to the single cardinal a 0 . But there is another method of 
correlation, in which only one ordinal corresponds to each cardinal. 
This method results from considering the series of cardinals itself. In 
this series, a 0 corresponds to a>, to a> + 1, and so on : there is always 
one and only one ordinal to describe the type of series presented by the 
cardinals from 0 up to any one of them. It seems to be assumed that 
there is a cardinal for every ordinal, and that no class can have so 
many terms that no well-ordered series can have a greater number of 
terms. For my part I do not see any grounds for either supposition, 
and I do see definite grounds against the latter. For every term of 
a series must be an individual, and must be a different individual (a 
point often overlooked) from every other term of the series. It must 
be different, because there are no instances of an individual : each 
individual is absolutely unique, and in the nature of the case only 
one. But two terms in a series are two, and are therefore not one 
and the same individual. This most important point is obscured by 
the fact that we do not, as a rule, fully describe the terms of our series. 
When we say : Consider a series a, 6, c, d> 6, d 9 e 9 a, ... , where terms 
are repeated at intervals — such a series, for example, as is presented by 
the digits in a decimal — we forget the theorem that where there is 
repetition our series is only obtainable by correlation; that is, the 

* Afannichfultigkeitslehre, p. 44. 

t Cf. supra, Chap, xxxvm, § 300. 



364 


Infinity and Continuity [chap, xliii 

terms do not themselves have an order, but they have a one-many 
(not one-one) relation to terms which have an order*. Hence if we 
wish for a genuine series we must either go back to the series with 
which our terms are correlated, or we must form the complex terms 
compounded of those of the original series and those of the correlated 
series in pairs. But in either of these series there is no repetition. 
Hence every ordinal number must correspond to a series of individuals, 
each of which differs from each other. Now it may be doubted whether 
all individuals form a series at all : for my part I cannot discover any 
transitive asymmetrical relation which holds between every pair of teiyns. 
Cantor, it is true, regards it as a law of thought that every definite 
aggregate can be well-ordered ; but I see no ground for this opinion. 
But allowing this view, the ordinals will have a perfectly definite 
maximum, namely that ordinal which represents the type of series 
formed by all terms without exception +. If the collection of all 
terms does not form a series it is impossible to prove that there 
must be a maximum ordinal, which in any case there are reasons for 
denying*. But in this case we may legitimately doubt whether there 
are as many ordinals as there are cardinals. Of course, if all cardinals 
form a well-ordered series, then there must be an ordinal for each cardinal. 
But although Cantor professes that he has a proof that of two different 
cardinals one must be the greater (Math. Anrmlen, xlvi, § 2), I cannot 
persuade myself that he does more than prove that there is a series, 
whose terms are cardinals of which any one is greater or less than any 
other. That all cardinals are in this series I see no reason to think. 
There may be two classes such that it is not possible to correlate either 
with a part of the other ; in this case the cardinal number of the one 
will be neither equal to, greater than, nor less than, that of the other. 
If all terms belong to a single well-ordered series, this is impossible; 
but if not, I cannot see any wav of showing that such a case cannot 
arise. Thus the first proof that there is no cardinal which cannot be 
increased seems to break down. 

346. The second of the proofs above referred to§ is quite different, 
and is far more definite. The # proof is interesting and important on its 
own account, and will be produced in outline. The article in which 
it occurs consists of three points : (1) a simple proof that there are 
powers higher than the first, (2) the remark that this method of proof 
can be applied to any power, (3) the application of the method to prove 
that there are powers higher than that of the continuum ||. Let us 

^ See ('hap. xxxii, Htipra. 

t On the maximum ordinal, see Burali-Forti, “Una questione sui numeri 
transfiniti,” Jtendieonti del cirrolo tnatematico di Palermo, 1897- Also my article in 
HdM, Vol. vin, p. 43 note. 

X Cf. Chap, xxx vni, § 301. 

§ Jakrexlperivht der detitxrhen Mathemntiker-Vereiniyuny, i. (1892), p. 77. 

|| Power is synonymous with cardinal numlter: the first power is that of the finite 
integers, i.e. a 0 . 



345, 346] The Philosophy of the Infinite 365 

examine the first of the above points, and then see whether the method 
is really general. 

Let m and w. Cantor says, be two mutually exclusive characters, and 
consider a collection M of elements 2£, where each element E is a 
denumerable collection, x 19 x n . . .x n9 ... 9 and each x is either an m ora u\ 
(The two characters m and w may be considered respectively as greater 
and less than some fixed term. Thus the #\s may be rational numbers, 
each of which is an m when it is greater than 1, and a ic when it is less 
than 1. These remarks are logically irrelevant, but they make the 
argument easier to follow .) The collection M is to consist of all possible 
elements E of the above description. Then M is not denumerable, i.e. 
is of a power higher than the first.. For let us take any denumerable 
collection of ATs, which are defined as follows : 

Ai = (fln, a U9 ... a in9 ...) 

E 2 — (tfju , (122 9 * ■ • 9 • • • ) 

Ep = ((lp i , Upty . . . ( l pn , . . . ) 

where the as are each an m or a w in some determinate manner. (For 
example, the first p terms of E p might be rn s, the rest all zc s. Or any 
other law' might be suggested, which insures that the E ?\ s of our series 
are all different.) Then however our series of E s be chosen, we can 
always find a term E 0 , belonging to the collection J/, but not to the 
denumerable series of E s. For let E 0 be the series (6,, b 29 . . ,b n . . .), 
where, for every n, b n is different from a nn — i.e. if a nn is an m 9 b n is a w 9 
and vice versa . Then every one of our denumerable series of Es 
contains at least one term not identical with the corresponding term 
of E oy and hence E 0 is not any one of the terms of our denumerable 

series of fTs. Hence no such series can contain all the Es 9 and 

therefore the E ? s are not denumerable, i.e. M has a power higher than 
the first. 

We need not stop to examine the proof that there is a power higher 
than that of the continuum, which is easily obtained from the above 
proof. We may proceed at once to the general proof that, given any 
collection whatever, there is a collection of a higher power. This proof 
is quite as simple as the proof of the particular case. It proceeds 
as follows. Let u be any class, and consider the class K of relations 
such that, if R be a relation of the class, every term of the class u 
has the relation K either to 0 or to 1. (Any other pair of terms 
will do as well as 0 and 1.) Then the class K has a higher power 
than the class u . To prove this, observe in the first place that K 
has certainly not a lower power; for, if x be any ?/, there will be a 
relation R of the class K such that every u except x has the relation 
R to 0, but x has this relation to 1. Relations of this kind, for the 
various values of x, form a class having a one.-one correlation with 
the terms of u, and contained in the class K. Hence K has at least 



366 Infinity and Continuity [ chap , xlhi 

the same power as u. To prove that K has a greater power, consider 
any class contained in K and having a one-one correlation with u . 
Then any relation of this class may be called R xy where x is some u — the 
suffix x denoting correlation with x. Let us now define a relation R 
by the following conditions : For every term x of u for which x has 
the relation R x to 0, let x have the relation R to 1 ; and for every term 
y of u for which y has the relation R y to 1, let y have the relation 
R to 0. Then R is defined for all terms of w, and is a relation of the 
class K ; but it is not any one of the relations R x . Hence, whatever 
class contained in K and of the same power as it we may take, there 
is always a term of K not belonging to this class ; and therefore K Has 
a higher power than u. 

347 . We may, to begin with, somewhat simplify this argument, 
by eliminating the mention of 0 and 1 and relations to them. Each 
of the relations of the class K is defined when we know which of the 
terms of u have this relation to 0, that is, it is defined by means of 
a class contained in u (including the null-class and u itself). Thus 
there is one relation of the class K for every class contained in u y 
and the number of K is the same as that of classes contained in u. 
Thus if k be any class whatever, the logical product ku is a class 
contained in «, and the number of K is that of ku y where k is a variable 
which may be any class. Thus the argument is reduced to this : that 
the number of classes contained in any class exceeds the number of terms 
belonging to the class*. 

Another form of the same argument is the following. Take any 
relation R which has the two properties (1 ) that its domain, which we 
will call p, is equal to its converse domain, (2) that no two terms of the 
domain have exactly the same set of relata. Then by means of R y any 
term of p is correlated with a class contained in p, namely the class 
of relata to which the said term is referent; and this correlation is 
one-one. We have to show that at least one class contained in p 
is omitted in this correlation. The class omitted is the class w which 
consists of all terms of the domain which do not have the relation R 
to themselves, i.e. the class w which is the domain of the logical product 
of R and diversity. For, if y be any term of the domain, and therefore 
of the converse domain, y belongs to w if it does not belong to the class 
correlated with y y and does not belong to w in the contrary case. Hence 
xv is not the same class as the correlate of y ; and this applies to what- 
ever term y we select. Hence the class w is necessarily omitted in the 
correlation. 

348 . The above argument, it must be confessed, appears to contain 
no dubitable assumption. Yet there are certain cases in which the 
conclusion seems plainly false. To begin with the class of all terms. 
If we assume, as was done in § 47, that every constituent of every 

* The number of classes contained in a class which has a members is 2 * ; thus 
the argument shows that 2* is always greater than a. 



367 


346 - 349 ] The Philosophy of the Infinite 

proposition is a term, then classes will be only some among terms. And 
conversely, since there is, for every term, a class consisting of that 
term only, there is a one-one correlation of all terms with some classes. 
Hence the number of classes should be the same as the number of 
terms*. This case is adequately met by the doctrine of types f, and 
so is the exactly analogous case of classes and classes of classes. But 
if we admit the notion of all objects J of every kind, it becomes evident 
that classes of objects must be only some among objects, while yet 
Cantor’s argument would show that there are more of them than there 
are objects. Or again, take the class of propositions. Every object 
can occur in some proposition, and it seems indubitable that there are 
at least as many propositions as there are objects. For, if u be a fixed 
class, “ x is a m” will be a different proposition for every different value 
of x ; if, according to the doctrine of types, we hold that, for a given w, 
x has a restricted range if “ x is a u ” is to remain significant, we only 
have to vary u suitably in order to obtain propositions of this form for 
every possible x, and thus the numl>er of propositions must be at least 
as great as that of objects. But classes of propositions are only some 
among objects, yet Cantor’s argument shows that there are more of 
them than there are propositions. Again, we can easily prove that 
there are more propositional functions than objects. For suppose a 
correlation of all objects and some propositional functions to have been 
affected, and let fa be the correlate of x. Then u not -fa(x)" i.e. “ fa 
does not hold of x ,” is a propositional function not contained in the 
correlation ; for it is true or false of x according as <f> x is false or true 
of x , and therefore it differs from fa for every value of x . But this 
case may perhaps be more or less met by the doctrine of types. 

349. It is instructive to examine in detail the application of Cantor’s 
argument to such cases by means of an actual attempted correlation. 
In the case of terms and classes, for example, if x be not a class, let us 
correlate it with ix, i.e. the class whose only member is x, but if x be a 
class, let us correlate it with itself. (This is not a one-one, but a 
many-one correlation, for x and tx are both correlated with lx ; but 
it will serve to illustrate the point in question.) Then the class which, 
according to Cantor’s argument, should be omitted from the correlation, 
is the class w of those classes which are not members of themselves; 
yet this, being a class, should be correlated with itself. But w, as we 
saw in Chapter x, is a self-contradictory class, which both is and is not 
a member of itself. The contradiction, in this case, can be solved by 
the doctrine of types; but the case of propositions is more difficult. 
In this case, let us correlate every class of propositions with the 

* This results from the theorem of Schroder and Bernstein, according to which, 
if u be similar to a part of v, and v to a part of u, then u and v must be similar. 
See Borel, Lemons mr la Theorit den Fonctiom (Paris, 1898), p. 102 ft. 

t See Chapter x. and Appendix B. 

J For the use of the word object see p. 55, note. 



368 


Infinity and Continuity [chap. XLm 

proposition which is its logical product ; by this means we appear to have 
a one-one relation of all classes of propositions to some propositions. 
But applying Cantor’s argument, we find that we have omitted the 
class w of those propositions which are logical products, but are not 
members of the classes of propositions whose logical products they 
are. This class, according to the definition of our correlation, should 
be correlated with its own logical product, but on examining this 
logical product, we find that it both is and is not a member of the 
class w whose logical product it is. \ 

Thus the application of Cantor’s argument to the doubtful cases 
yields contradictions, though I have been unable to find any point ih 
which the argument appears faulty. The only solution I can suggest 
is, to accept the conclusion that there is no greatest number and the 
doctrine of types, and to deny that there are any true propositions 
concerning all objects or all propositions. Yet the latter, at least, 
seems plainly false, since all propositions are at any rate true or false, 
even if they had no other common properties. In this unsatisfactory 
state, I reluctantly leave the problem to the ingenuity of the reader. 

350. To sum up the discussions of this Part : We saw, to begin 
with, that irrationals are to be defined as those segments of rationals 
which have no limit, and that in this way analysis is able to dispense 
with any special axiom of continuity. We saw that it is possible to 
define, in a purely ordinal manner, the kind of continuity which belongs 
to real numbers, and that continuity so defined is not self-contradictory. 
We found that the differential and integral calculus has no need of the 
infinitesimal, and that, though some forms of infinitesimal are admissible, 
the most usual form, that of infinitesimal segments in a compact series, 
is not implied by either compactness or continuity, and is in fact 
self-contradictory. Finally we discussed the philosophical questions 
concerning continuity and infinity, and found that the arguments of 
Zeno, though largely valid, raise no sort of serious difficulty. Having 
grasped clearly the twofold definition of the infinite, as that which 
cannot be reached by mathematical induction starting from 1, and as 
that which has parts which have the same number of terms as itself — 
definitions which may be distinguished as ordinal and cardinal re- 
spectively — we found that all the usual arguments, both as to infinity 
and as to continuity, are fallacious, and that no definite contradiction 
can be proved concerning either, although certain special infinite classes 
do give rise to hitherto unsolved contradictions. 

It remains to apply to space, time, and motion, the three chief re- 
sults of this discussion, which are (1) the impossibility of infinitesimal 
segments, (2) the definition of continuity, and (3) the definition and 
the consistent doctrine of the infinite. These applications will, I 
hope, persuade the reader that the above somewhat lengthy discussions 
have not been superfluous. 



PART 


VI. 


SPACE. 




CHAPTER XLIV. 


DIMENSIONS AND COMPLEX NUMBERS. 

351. Thk discussions of the preceding Parts have been concerned 
with two main themes, the logical theory of numbers and the theory 
of one-dimensional series. In the first two Parts, it was shown how, 
from the indispensable apparatus of general logical notions, the theory 
of finite integers and of rational numbers without sign could l)e de- 
veloped. In the third Part, a particular case of order, namely the 
order of magnitude, was examined on its own account, and it was found 
that most of the problems arising in the theory of quantity arc purely 
ordinal. In the fourth Part, the general nature of one-dimensional 
series was set forth, and it was shown that all the arithmetical propo- 
sitions obtained by means of the logical theory of finite numbers could 
also be proved by assuming that the finite integers form a series of the 
kind which we called a progression. In the fifth Part, we examined 
the problems raised by endless series and by compact series — problems 
which, under the names of infinity and continuity, have defied philo- 
sophers ever since the dawn of abstract thought. The discussion of 
these problems led to a combination of the logical and ordinal theories 
of Arithmetic, and to the rejection, as universally valid, of two connected 
principles which, following Cantor, we regarded as definitions of the 
finite, not as applicable to all collections or series. These two principles 
were: (1) If one class be wholly contained in, but not coextensive with, 
another, then the one has not the same number of terms as the other ; 
(2) mathematical induction, which is purely ordinal, and may be stated 
as follows : A series generated by a one-one relation, and having a 
first term, is such that any property, belonging to the first term and 
to the successor of any possessor of the property, belongs to every term 
of the series. These two principles we regal’d ed as definitions of finite 
classes and of progressions or finite series respectively, but as inapplicable 
to some classes and some series. This view, we found, resolves all the 
difficulties of infinity and continuity, except a purely logical difficulty 
as to the notion of dll classes. With this result, we completed the 
philosophical theory of one-dimensional series. 



372 


Space [chap, xliv 

352. But in all our previous discussions, large branches of mathe- 
matics have remained unmentioned. One of the generalizations of 
number, namely complex numbers, has been excluded completely, and 
no mention has been made of the imaginary. The whole of Geometry, 
also, has been hitherto foreign to our thoughts. These two omissions 
were connected. Not that we are to accept a geometrical, i.e. spatial, 
theory of complex numbers : this would be as much out of place as 
a geometrical theory of irrationals. Although this Part is called Spqce , 
we are to remain in the region of pure mathematics : the mathematical 
entities discussed will have certain affinities to the space of the acti^al 
world, but they will be discussed without any logical dependence upon 
these affinities. Geometry may be considered as a pure a priori science, 
or as the study of actual space. In the latter sense, I hold it to be 
an experimental science, to be conducted by means of careful measure- 
ments. But it is not in this latter sense that I wish to discuss it. 
As a branch of pure mathematics, Geometry is strictly deductive, 
indifferent to the choice of its premisses and to the question whether 
there exist (in the strict sense) such entities as its premisses define. 
Many different and even inconsistent sets of premisses lead to propo- 
sitions which would be called geometrical, but all such sets have a 
common element. This element is wholly summed up by the statement 
that Geometry deals with series of more than one dimension. The 
question what may be the actual terms of such series is indifferent 
to Geometry, which examines only the consequences of the relations 
which it postulates among the terms. These relations are always such 
as to generate a series of more than one dimension, but have, so far 
as I can see, no other general point of agreement. Series of more than 
one dimension I shall call multiple series : those of one dimension will 
be called simple . What is meant by dimensions I shall endeavour to 
explain in the course of the present chapter. At present, I shall set 
up, by anticipation, the following definition : Geometry is the study of 
series of two or more dimensions. This definition, it will be seen, causes 
complex numbers to form part of the subject-matter of Geometry, since 
they constitute a two-dimensional series; but it does not show that 
complex numbers have any logical dependence upon actual space. 

The above definition of Geometry is, no doubt, somewhat unusual, 
and will produce, especially upon Kantian philosophers, an appearance 
of wilful misuse of words. I believe, however, that it represents 
correctly the present usage of mathematicians, though it is not necessary 
for them to give an explicit definition of their subject. How it has 
come to bear this meaning, may be explained by a brief historical 
retrospect, which will illustrate also the difference between pure and 
applied mathematics. 

353. Until the nineteenth century, Geometry meant Euclidean 
Geometry, i.e . a certain system of propositions deduced from premisses 



373 


352, 353] Dimensions and Complex Numbers 

which were supposed to describe the space in which we live. The 
subject was pursued verv largely because (what is no doubt important 
to the engineer) its results were practically applicable in the existent 
world, and embodied in themselves scientific truths. But in older to 
be sure that this was so, one of two things was necessary. Either 
we must be certain of the truth of the premisses on their own account, 
or we must be able to show that no other set of premisses would give 
results consistent with experience. The first of these alternatives was 
adopted by the idealists and was especially advocated by Kant. The 
second alternative represents, roughly, the position of empiricists before 
the non -Euclidean period (among whom we must include Mill). But 
objections were raised to both alternatives. For the Kantian view, 
it was necessary to maintain that all the axioms are self-evident — a view 
which honest people found it hard to extend to the axiom of parallels. 
Hence arose a search for more plausible axioms, w'hich might be de- 
clared a priori truths. But, though many such axioms were suggested, 
all could sanely be doubted, and the search only led to scepticism. 
The second alternative — the view that no other axioms would give 
results consistent with experience — could only be tested by a greater 
nmthematical ability than falls to the lot of most philosophers. Accord- 
ingly the test was w'anting until 1 jobatchewsky and Bolyai developed 
their non-Euclidean system. It was then proved, with all the cogency 
of mathematical demonstration, that premisses other than Euclid’s 
could give results empirically indistinguishable, within the limits of 
observation, from those of the orthodox system. Hence the empirical 
argument for Euclid was also destroyed. But the investigation produced 
a new spirit among Geometers. Having found that the denial of 
Euclid’s axiom of parallels led to a different system, which was self- 
consistent, and possibly true of the actual world, mathematicians became 
interested in the development of the consequences flowing from other 
sets of axioms more or less resembling Euclid’s. Hence arose a large 
number of Geometries, inconsistent, as a rule, with each other, but 
each internally self-consistent. The resemblance to Euclid required in 
a suggested set of axioms has gradually grown less, and possible 
deductive systems have been more and more investigated on their 
own account. In this way, Geometry has become (what it was formerly 
mistakenly called) a branch of pure mathematics, that is to say, a subject 
in w r hich the assertions are that such and such consequences follow' from 
such and such premisses, not that entities such as the premisses describe 
actually exist. That is to say, if Euclid’s axioms be called A , and P be 
anv proposition implied by A , then, in the Geometry' which preceded 
Lobatchewsky, P itself would be asserted, since A was asserted. But 
now-a-days, the geometer would only assert that A implies P , leaving 
A and P themselves doubtful. And he would have other sets of axioms, 
A 19 A s ... implying P 19 /**.-. respectively: the implication* would belong 



374 Space [chap, xuv 

to Geometry, but not A l or P x or any of the other actual axioms and 
propositions. Thus Geometry no longer throws any direct light on 
the nature of actual space. But indirectly, the increased analysis and 
knowledge of possibilities, resulting from modern Geometry, has thrown 
immense light upon our actual space. Moreover it is now proved (what 
is fatal to the Kantian philosophy) that every Geometry is rigidly 
deductive, and does not employ any forms of reasoning but such as 
apply to Arithmetic and all other deductive sciences. My aim, in what 
follows, will be to set forth first, in brief outlines, what is philosophically 
important in the deductions which constitute modern Geometry, add 
then to proceed to those questions, in the philosophy of space, upon which 
mathematics throws light. In the first section of this Part, though 
I shall be discussing Geometries as branches of pure mathematics, I 
shall select for discussion only those which throw the most light either 
upon actual space, or upon the nature of mathematical reasoning. A 
treatise on non-Euclidean Geometry is neither necessary nor desirable in 
a general work such as the present, and will therefore not be found in 
the following chapters. 

364. Geometry, we said, is the study of series which have more 
than one dimension. It is now time to define dimensions, and to 
explain what is meant by a multiple series. The relevance of our 
definition to Geometry will appear from the fact that the mere defini- 
tion of dimensions leads to a duality closely analogous to that of 
projective Geometry. 

Ix*t us begin with two dimensions. A series of two dimensions 
arises as follows. I^et there be some asymmetrical transitive relation P, 
which generates a series u x . Let every term of u x be itself an asym- 
metrical transitive relation, which generates a series. Let all the field 
of P form a simple series of asymmetrical relations, and let each of these 
have a simple series of terms for its field. Then the class u 2 of terms 
forming the fields of all the relations in the series generated by P 
is a two-dimensional series. In other words, the total field of a class 
of asymmetrical transitive relations forming a simple series is a double 
scries. But instead of starting from the asymmetrical relation P 9 we 
may start from the terms. Let ther° be a class of terms if,, of which 
any given one (with possibly one exception) belongs to the field of one 
and only one of a certain class w, of serial relations. That is if x be a 
term of if,, x is also a term of the field of some relation of the class u x . 
Now' further let n x be a series. Then if, will be a double series. This 
seems to constitute the definition of two-dimensional series. 

To obtain three dimensions, we have only to suppose that if, itself 
consists of series, or of asymmetrical transitive relations. Or, starting 
with the terms of the three-dimensional series, let any term of a certain 
class % belong to one and only one series (again with one possible 
exception, which may belong to many series) of a certain class if,. I^t 



375 


353 - 355 ] Dimensions and Complex Numbers 

every term of be a term of some series belonging to a class m, of series, 
and let u x itself be a simple series. Then is a triple series, or a series 
of three dimensions. Proceeding in this way, we obtain the definition 
of n dimensions, which may be given as follows : Let there be some 
series w, whose terms are all themselves serial relations. If oc x be any 
term of and a\ x any term of the field of let .r s be again a serial 
relation, and so on. Proceeding to «r 8 , *r 4 , etc., let .r n _ u however 
obtained, be always a relation generating a simple series. Then all the 
terms x n lxJonging to the field of any serial relation .r n _,, form an 
w-dirnensional series. Or, to give the definition which starts from the 
terms : Let u n be a class of terms, any one of which, x n say, belongs to 
the field of some serial relation, *r n _] sav. which itself belongs to a 
definite class u n -\ of serial relations. Let each term .r n in general 
belong to the field of only one serial relation .r n _, (with exceptions 
which need not be discussed at present). Let M n __, lead to a new 
class u n —>j of serial relations, in exactly the way in which u n led to n M _ 
I^et this proceed until we reach a class ?/, , and let u x be a simple series. 
Then u n is a series of n dimensions. 

355. Before proceeding further, some observations on the above 
definitions may be useful. In the first place, we have just seen that 
alternative definitions of dimensions suggest themselves, which have a 
relation analogous to what is called duality in projective Geometry. 
How far this analogy extends, is a question which we cannot discuss 
until we have examined projective Geometry. In the second place, 
every series of n dimensions involves series of all smaller numbers of 
dimensions, but a series of (w-1) dimensions does not in general 
imply one of n dimensions. In the second form of the definition of n 
dimensions, the class u»_ 1 is a series of (» - 1 ) dimensions, and generally, 
if m be less than w, the class u n - m is a series of (n — m) dimensions. 
And in the other method, all possible terms together form a series 
of (n — 1) dimensions, and so on. In the third place, if n be finite, a 
class which is an a-dimensional series is also a one-dimensional series. 
'Phis may be established by the following rules: In the class w,, which 
is a simple series, preserve the order unchanged. In m*, keep the in- 
ternal order of each series unchanged, and place that series before which 
comes before in ?/„ and that after which comes after in u,. Thus u* is 
converted into a simple series. Apply now the same process to M a , and 
so on. Then by mathematical induction, if a be finite, or be any infinite 
ordinal number, u n can be converted into a simple series. This remark- 
able fact, which was discovered, for finite numbers and a>, by Cantor*, 

* Cantor has proved, not only that a simple series can be so formed, but that, 
if n be not greater than o>, and the constituent series all have the same cardinal 
number, this is also the cardinal number of the resultant series: ?>. an w-dimensional 
space has the same cardinal number of points as a finite portion of a line. See 
Acta Math. 11 , p. «314ff. 



876 


Space [chap, xliv 

has a very important bearing on the foundations of Geometry. In 
the fourth place, the definition of n dimensions can be extended to 
the case where n is a>, the first of the transfinite ordinals. For this 
purpose, it is only necessary to suppose that, whatever finite number m 
we may take, anv u m will belong to some simple series of series « m+1 ; 
and that the set] uence of clashes of series so obtained obeys mathematical 
induction, and is therefore a progression. Then the number of dimen - 
sions is to. This case brings out, what does not appear so clearly from 
the case of a finite number of dimensions, that the number of dimensions 
is an ordinal number. \ 

366. There are very many ways of generating multiple series, as 
there are of generating simple series. The discussion of these various 
ways is not, however, of great importance, since it would follow closely 
the discussion of Part IV, Chapter xxiv. Instances will meet us in the 
course of our examination of the various Geometries; and this exam- 
ination will give opportunities of testing our definition of dimensions. 
For the present, it is only important to observe that dimensions, like 
order and continuity, are defined in purely abstract terms, without any 
reference to actual space. Thus when we say that space has three 
dimensions, we are not merely attributing to it an idea which can 
only be obtained from spare, but we are effecting part of the actual 
logical analysis of space. This will appear more clearly from the 
applicability of dimensions to complex numbers, to which we must 
now turn our attention. 

357. The theory of imaginarics was formerly considered a very 
important branch of mathematical philosophy, but it has lost its 
philosophical importance by ceasing to be controversial. The ex- 
amination of imaginarics led, on the Continent, to the Theory of 
Functions — a subject which, in spite of its overwhelming mathematical 
importance, appeal's to have little interest for the philosopher. But. 
among ourselves the same examination took a more abstract direction : 
it led to an examination of the principles of symbolism, the formal 
laws of addition and multiplication, and the general nature of a 
Calculus. Hence arose a freer spirit towards ordinary Algebra, and 
the possibility of regarding it (like ordinary Geometry) as one species 
of a genus. This was the guiding spirit of Sir William Hamilton, 
I)e Morgan, Jevons and Peirce — to whom, as regards the result, 
though not as regards the motive, we must add Boole and Grassmann. 
Hence the philosophy of imaginaries became merged in the far 
wider and more interesting problems of Universal Algebra*. These 
problems cannot, in my opinion, be dealt with by starting with 
the genus, and asking ourselves; what are the essential principles of 
any Calculus? It is necessary to adopt a more inductive method, and 

* See Whitehead, Unitvr#<tl Algebra, Cambridge, 1808; especially Book 1. 



377 


355 - 358 ] Dimension s and Complex Numbers 

examine the various species one by one. The mathematical portion of 
this task has been admirably performed by Mr Whitehead : the philo- 
sophical portion is attempted in the present work. The possibility of a 
deductive Universal Algebra is often based upon a supposed principle of 
the Permanence of Form. Thus it is said, for example, that complex 
numbers must, in virtue of this principle, obey the same laws of addition 
and multiplication, as real numbers obey. But as a matter of fact there 
is no such principle. In Universal Algebra, our symbols of operation, 
such as + and x , are variables, the hypothesis of any one Algebra being 
that these symbols obey certain prescribed rules. In order that such an 
Algebra should be important, it is necessary that there should be at 
least one instance in which the suggested rules of operation are verified. 
But even this restriction does not enable us to make any general formal 
statement as to all possible rules of operation. The principle of the 
Permanence of Form, therefore, must be regarded as simply a mistake : 
other operations than arithmetical addition may have some or all of its 
formal properties, but operations can easily be suggested which lack some 
or all of these properties. 

358. Complex numbers first appeared in mathematics through the 
algebraical generalization of number. The principle of this generaliza- 
tion is the following : Given some class of numbers, it is required that 
numbers should be discovered or invented which will render soluble any 
equation in one variable, whose coefficients are chosen from the said 
class of numbers. Starting with positive integers, this method leads 
at once, by means of simple equations alone, to all rational numbers 
positive and negative. Equations of finite degrees will give all the 
so-called algebraic numbers, but to obtain transcendent numbers, such 
as e and 7 r, we need equations which are not of any finite degree. In 
this respect the algebraical generalization is very inferior to the arith- 
metical, since the latter gives all irrationals by a uniform method, 
whereas the former, strictly speaking, will give only the algebraic 
numbers. But with regard to complex numbers, the matter is other- 
wise. No arithmetical problem leads to these, and they are wholly 
incapable of arithmetical definition. But the attempt to solve such 
equations as a* + 1 = 0, or .r* + x 4 - 1 = 0, at once demands a new class 
of numbers, since, in the whole domain of real numbers, none can be 
found to satisfy these equations. To meet such cases, the algebraical 
generalization defined new numbers by means of the equations w r hose 
roots they were. It showed that, assuming these new numbers to obey 
the usual laws of multiplication, each of them fell into two parts, one 
real, the other the product of some real number and a fixed number of 
the new kind. This fixed number could be chosen arbitrarily, and was 
always taken to be one of the square roots of —1. Numbers thus 
composed of two parts were called complex numbers, and it was shown 
that no algebraic operation upon them could lead to any new class of 



878 Space [chap, xmv 

numbers. What is still more remarkable, it was proved that any further 
generalization must lead to numbers disobeying some of the formal laws 
of Arithmetic*. *But the algebraical generalization was wholly unable 
(as it was, in truth, at every previous stage) to prove that there are 
such entities as those which it postulated. If the said equations have 
roots, then the roots have such and such properties ; this is all that 
the algebraical method allows us to infer. There is, however, no law 
of nature to the effect that every equation i mutt have a root;! on 
the contrary, it is quite essential to be able to point out actual 
entities which do have the properties demanded by the algebraical 
generalization. ‘ 

359. The discovery of such entities is only to be obtained by 
means of the theory of dimensions. Ordinary complex numbers form 
a series of two dimensions of a certain type, which happen to occur as 
roots of equations in which the coefficients are real. Complex numl>ers 
of a higher order represent a certain tvpe of //-dimensional series, but 
here there is no algebraical problem concerning real numbers which they 
are required to solve. As a matter of fact, however, the algebraical 
generalization, as we have seen, does not tell us what our new entities 
are, nor whether they are entities at all : moreover it encourages the 
erroneous view that complex numbers whose imaginary part vanishes 
are real numbers. This error is analogous to that of supposing that 
some real numbers are rational, some rational* integral, and positive 
integers identical with signless integers. All the above errors having 
been exposed at length, the reader will probably be willing to admit 
the corresponding error in the present case. No complex number, then, 
is a real number, but each is a term in some multiple series. It is not 
worth while to examine specially the usual two-dimensional complex 
numbers, whose claims, as we have seen, are purely technical. I shall 
therefore proceed at once to systems with n units. I shall give first the 
usual purely formal definition t, then the logical objections to this 
definition, and then the definition which I propose to substitute. 

Let n different entities, t l9 c 2 , c n , which we may call elements 

or units, be given ; and let each be capable of association with any real 
number, or, in special cases, with any rational or any integer. In this 
way let entities a,e r arise, where cl, is a number, and or,^, differs from a/v 
unless r = ,vand or r = a,. That is, if either the numerical or the non- 
numerical parts of a^ r and be different, then the wholes are different. 
Further, let there be a way of combining a,r, , a#.,, . . ., or H e n , for each 
set of values a,, at „, ... a n , to form a new entity. (The class whose 
members are ... a n e n will be such an entity.) Then the com- 

bination, which may be written as 

a = a,c, + a#* + + . . . + a«c n , 

* See Stolz, AUyemeine Arithmetik , n, Section 1, § 10. 

t See Stolz, ibirf. n. Section 1 , § !>. 



879 


358-360] Dimensions and Complex Numbers 

is a complex number of the nth order. The arrangement of the 
component terms a^, ot^ 2 , ... a n ^» may or may not be essential to 
the definition; but the only thing always essential is, that the com- 
bination should be such that a difference in any one or more of the 
numbers a,, ... a n insures a difference in the resulting complex 

number. 

360. The above definition suffers from the defect that it does not 
point out any one entity which is the complex number defined by a set 
of real numbers. Given two real numbers, a , the two complex nuin bers 
a + ib , b + ia are determinate ; and it is desirable that such determinate- 
ness should appear in the general definition of complex numbers of any 
order. But the e\ in the above definition are variables, and the 
suggested complex number is only determinate when the e\ are specified 
as well as the as. Where, as in metrical Geometry or in the Dynamics 
of a finite system of particles, there are important meanings for the e\ 
we may find that complex numbers in the above sense are important. 
But no special interpretation can give us the complex number associated 
with a given set of real numbers. We might take as the complex 
number the class of all such entities as the above for all possible values 
of the e's ; but such a class would be too general to serve our purposes. 
A better method seems to be the following. 

We wish a complex number of the //th order to be specified bv the 
enumeration of n real numbers in a certain older, i.e. by the numbers a M 
o 2 , ... a*, where the order is indicated by the suffix. But we cannot 
define a complex number as a Meries of n real numbers, because the same 
real number may recur, i.e. Or and a s need not be different whenever r 
and «v are different. Thus what defines a real number is a one-many 
relation whose domain consists of real numbers and whose converse 
domain consists of the first n integers (or, in the case of a complex 
number of infinite order, of all the integers) ; for the suffix in a, indicates 
correlation with the integer r. Such one-many relations may be defined 
to be the complex numbers, and in this way a purely arithmetical defi- 
nition is obtained. The //-dimensional series of complex numbers of 
older n results from arranging all complex numbers w hich differ only 
as to (say) a r in the order of the real numbers which are a r in the 
various cases. 

In order that complex numbers in the sense defined by Stolz should 
have any importance, there must be some motive for considering 
assemblages of terms selected out of continue Such a motive exists 
in a metrical space of n dimensions, owing to a circumstance which is 
essential to the utility, though not to the definition, of complex 
numbers. Let a collection of entities (points) be given, each of which 
lias to each of the entities r,, e. Z9 ... e n a numerically measurable relation 
(distance), and let each be uniquely defined by the ?/ relations which it 
has to e,, ... c n . Then the complex number a will represent one of 



380 


Space [chap, xliv 

this collection of entities, and the elements e„ ... e n will themselves 
be terms of the collection*. Thus there is a motive for considering the 
numbers a, which in the general case is practically absent f- But what 
is essential to observe, and what applies equally to the usual complex 
numbers of Algebra, is this : our numbers are not purely arithmetical, 
but involve essential reference to a plurality of dimensions. Thus we 
have definitely passed beyond the domain of Arithmetic, and this was 
my reason for postponing the consideration of complex numbers to this 
late stage. 


* e, is not identical with 1 xe,+0xe,+.... The former is a point, the latter a 
complex number. 

t In geometrical applications, it is usual to consider only the ratio* a, : a, : ... : o* 
as relevant. In this case, our series has only (n - 1) dimensions. 



CHAPTER XLV. 


PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY. 

361. The foundations of Geometry have been subjected, in recent 
times, to a threefold scrutiny. First came the work of the non- 
Euclideans, which showed that various axioms, long known to be 
sufficient for certain results, were also necessary, i.e. that results in- 
consistent with the usual results but consistent with each other followed 
from the denial of those axioms. Next came the work of Dedekind 
and Cantor on the nature of continuity, which showed the necessity 
of investigating carefully the prerequisites of analytical Geometry. 
Lastly, a great change has been introduced by the Italian work on 
closed series, mentioned in Part IV., in virtue of which we are able, 
given a certain type of relation between four points of a line, to 
introduce an order of all the points of a line. The work of the 
non-Euclideans has, by this time, produced probably almost all the 
modifications that it is likely to produce in the foundations, while 
the work of Dedekind and Cantor only becomes relevant at a fairly 
advanced stage of Geometry. The work on closed series, on the contrary, 
being very recent, has not yet been universally recognized, although, as 
we shall see in the present chapter, it has enormously increased the 
range of pure projective Geometry. 

362. In the discussions of the present Part, I shall not divide 
Geometries, as a rule, into Euclidean, hyperbolic, elliptic, and so on, 
though I shall of course recognize this division and mention it whenever 
it is relevant. But this is not so fundamental a division as another, 
which applies, generally speaking, within each of the above kinds of 
Geometry, and corresponds to a greater logical difference. The above 
kinds differ, not in respect of the indefinables with which we start, 
nor yet in respect of the majority of the axioms, but only in respect 
of comparatively few and late axioms. The three kinds which I wish 
to discuss differ both in respect of the indefinables and in respect of the 
axioms, but unlike the three previous kinds, they are, roughly speaking, 
mutually compatible. That is to say, given a certain body of geo- 
metrical propositions concerning a certain number of entities, it is more 



382 


Space [chap, xlv 

or less arbitrary which of the entities we take as indefinable and which 
of the propositions as indemonstrable. But the logical differences which 
result from different selections are very great, and the systems of de- 
ductions to which different selections lead must be separately discussed. 

All Geometries, as commonly developed, agree in starting with 
points as indefinables. That is, there is a certain class-concept jtoint 
(which need not be the same in different Geometries), of which we 
assume that there are at least two, or three, or four instances, according 
to circumstances. Further instances, i.e. further points, result m>m 
special assumptions in the various cases. Where the three great types 
of Geometry begin to diverge is as regards the straight line. Projective 
Geometry begins with the whole straight line, i.e. it asserts that any 
two points determine a certain class of points which is also determined 
by any two other members of the class. If this class be regarded as 
determined in virtue of a relation between the two [joints, then this 
relation is symmetrical. What I shall call Descriptive Geometry, on 
the contrary, begins with an asymmetrical relation, or a line with sense, 
which may be called a ray ; or again it may begin by regarding two 
points as determining the stretch of points between them. Metrical 
Geometry, finally, takes the straight line in either of the above senses, 
and adds either a second relation between any two points, namely 
distance, which is a magnitude, or else the consideration of stretches 
as magnitudes. Thus in regard to the relations of two points, the 
three kinds of Geometry take different indefinables, and have cor- 
responding differences of axioms. Any one of the three, by a suitable 
choice of axioms, will lead to any required Euclidean or non-Euclidean 
space ; but the first, as we shall see, is not capable of yielding as many 
propositions as result from the second or the third. In the present 
chapter, I am going to assume that set of axioms which gives the 
simplest form of projective Geometry; and I shall call any collection 
of entities satisfying these axioms a projective space. We shall see in 
the next chapter how to obtain a set of entities forming a projective 
space from a set forming a Euclidean or hyperbolic space ; projective 
space itself is, so far as it goes, indistinguishable from the polar form 
of elliptic space. It is defined, like all mathematical entities, solely by 
the formal nature of the relations l>etwecn its constituents, not by what 
those constituents arc in themselves. Thus we shall see in the following 
chapter that the “points’ 1 of a projective space may each be an infinite 
class of straight lines in a non -projective space. So long as the 
“points” have the requisite type of mutual relations, the definition 
is satisfied. 

363. Projective Geometry assumes a class of entities, called points , 
to which it assigns certain projjerties *. In the first place, there are to 

* hi what follows, 1 am mainly indebted to Pieri, I Printnpii della Geometria di 
Posisiom. Turin, 1898. This is, in my opinion, the best work on the present 
subject. 



362 , 363 ] Prqjective Geometry 383 

be at least two different points a and ft say. These two points are 
to determine a certain class of points, their straight line, which we 
will call ah. This class is determined by b and a, as well as by a and ft, 
he. there is no order of a and b involved ; moreover a (and therefore 6) 
is itself a member of the class. Further, the class contains at least 
one point other than a and b ; if c be any such point, then b belongs to 
the class or, and every point of or belongs to aft. With these assump- 
tions it follows* that, if c, d be any points of aft, then cd and aft 
coincide — he. any two points of a line determine that line, or two lines 
coincide if they have two points in common. 

Before proceeding further, let us consider for a moment what is 
meant by saving that two points determine a class of points. This 
expression is often thought to require no explanation, but as a matter 
of fact it is not a perfectly precise statement. The precise statement 
of what is meant is this : There is a certain definite relation (A^ say) 
which holds between any couple of points and one and only one cor- 
responding class of points. Without some such definite relation, there 
could be no question of two points determining a class. The relation K 
may be ultimate and indefinable, in which case we need the above 
properties of the class aft. We may obtain, however, a derivative 
relation between two points, ft and c say, namely that of being both 
collinear with a given point a. This relation will be transitive and 
symmetrical, but will always involve reference to a term other than 
those (ft and c) which are its terms. "Ibis suggests, as a simplification, 
that instead of a relation K between a couple of points and a class 
of points, we might have a relation R between the two points a and ft. 
If R be a symmetrical aliorelative, transitive so far as its being an 
aliorelative will permit (he. if aRb and bRc imply a/fc, unless a and c 
are identical), the above properties of the straight line will belong 
to the class of terms having to a the relation R together with a itself. 
This view seems simpler than the former, and leads to the same results. 
Since the view that the straight line is derived from a relation of two 
points is the simpler, I shall in general adopt it. Any two points a, 
ft have, then, a relation R a b ; c have a relation R ae . If Rob and R ac 
are identical, while 6 and c differ, R he is identical with both R ah and 
R m ; if not, not. It is to be observed that the formal properties of any 
such relation R are those belonging to the disjunction of an asym- 
metrical transitive relation and its converse— e.g. greater or less, before 
or after, etc. These are all symmetrical aliorelatives, and are transitive so 
far as their being aliorelatives will permit. But not all relations of the 
type in question are analyzable into a transitive asymmetrical relation 
or its converse; for diversity, which is of the above type, is not so 
analyzable. Hence to assume that the straight line can be generated 


* Pieri, op. cit. § 1, prop. 25. 



884 


Space [chap, xlv 

by an asymmetrical relation and its converse is a* new assumption, 
characteristic of what I shall call Descriptive Geometry. For the 
present, such an assumption would be out of place. We have, then, 
two indefinables, namely point , and the relation R or K*. No others 
are required in projective space. 

364 . The next point is the definition of the plane. It is one of 
the merits of projective space that, unlike other spaces, it allows a very 
simple and easy definition of the plane. For this purpose, we need 
a new axiom, namely : If a, 6 be two distinct points, there is at l&st 
one point not belonging to ab. Let this be c. Then the plane is t^ie 
class of points lying on any line determined by c and any point x of db. 
That is, if x be any point of ab y and y any point of cx , then y is a poiht 
of the plane cab ; and if y be a point of the plane cab y then there is 
some point x in ab such that y is a point of cx. It is to be observed 
that this definition will not apply to the Euclidean or hyperbolic plane, 
since in these two lines may fail to intersect. The exclusion of Euclidean 
and hyperbolic space results from the following axiom f : “ If a y b y c be 
three non-collinear points, and a be a point of be other than b and c, 
V a point of ac other than a and c, then there is a point common to aa 
and bb' . Tl By means of this axiom we can prove that the plane cab is 
the same as the plane abc or bac y and generally that, if d y e y f be any 
three non-collinear points of abc y the plane def coincides with the plane 
abc ; we can also show that any two lines in a plane intersect. 

366. We can now proceed to the harmonic range and von Staudfs 
quadrilateral construction. Given three collinear points a y b y c take any 
two points u y v collinear with c but not on ab. Construct the points of 
intersection au . bv and av .bn ; join these points, and let the line 
joining them meet ab in d. This construction is called the quadrilateral 
construction. If we now assume that outside the plane aba there is at 
least one point, we can prove that the point d is independent of u and v y 
and is uniquely determined by a, b y c. The point d is called the 
harmonic of c with respect to a and b y and the four points are said to 
form a harmonic range. The uniqueness \ of the above construction — 
the proof of which, it should be observed, requires a point not in the 
plane of the construction || — is the fundamental proposition of projective 
Geometry. It gives a relation which may hold between four points of a 
line, and which, when two are given, is one-one as regards the other 

* We shall see in Chap, xux that these notions, which are here provisionally 
undefined, are themselves variable members of definable classes. 

+ Pieri, op. cit , § 3, p. 9. 

J The proof of the uniqueness of the quadrilateral construction will be found in 
any text-book of Projective Geometry, e.g. in Cremona's (Oxford 1893), Chap. vm. 

|| A proof that this proposition requires three dimensions is easily derivable from 
a theorem given by Hilbert, Grundiagen der Geometric , p. 61 (Gauss- Weber Fest- 
schrift, Leipzig, 1899). 



363 - 366 ] Projective Geometry 386 

two. Denoting “c and d are harmonic with respect to a and ft* * * § by 
cHatfl , the following properties of the relation are important : (1) cH^yd 
implies dH a yr, i.e. Hob is symmetrical; (2) cH a yd implies aH «fft, ue. 
the relation of the pairs <zft, cd is symmetrical ; (3) cH ^ implies that 
c and d are different points, i.e. H & is an aliorelative. This last 
property is independent of the others, and has to be introduced by an 
axiom*. 

Having obtained the harmonic range, we may proceed in two 
different directions. We may regard the harmonic relation as a re- 
lation of two pairs of points : hence, by keeping one of the pairs fixed, 
we obtain what is called an involution. Or we may regard the harmonic 
relation, as in the symbol cH a yd y as a relation between two points, 
which involves a reference to two others. In this way, regarding «, ft, r, 
as fixed, we obtain three new points <Z, e> f on the line ab by the 
relations eH ab fl , a hH ae f. Each of these may be used, with two 
of the previous points, to determine a fourth point, and so on. This 
leads to what Mobilise calls a net , and forms the method by which 
Klein J introduces projective coordinates. This construction gives also 
the method of defining an harmonic ratio. These two directions in 
which projective Geometry may be developed must be separately pursued 
to begin with. I shall take the former first. 

366 . By means of the harmonic relation, we define an involution. 
This consists of all pairs of points which are harmonic conjugates with 
respect to two fixed points ||. That is to say, if a, ft be the two fixed 
points, an involution is composed of all pairs of points x, y such that 
xHaby. If four points x 9 y , x\ y' be given, it may or may not happen 
that there exist two points a, 6 such that xH^y and x H^y . The 
possibility of finding such points a, ft constituted a certain relation of 
x, y to x\ y . It is plain that this relation sometimes holds, for it 
holds when #, y are respectively identical with a/, y. It is plain also 
that it sometimes does not hold ; for if x and y be identical, but not x f 
and y\ then the relation is impossible. Pieri§ has shown how, by means 
of certain axioms, this relation of four terms may be used to divide the 
straight line into two segments with respect to any two of its points, 
and to generate an order of all the points on a line. (It must be borne 

* See Fano, Gtomale di Matimatiche , Vol. 30 ; Fieri, op. cit . § 4, p. 17 and 
Appendix. Fano has proved the necessity of the above axiom in the only conclusive 
manner, by constructing a system satisfying all the previous axioms, but not this 
one. The discovery of its necessity is due to him. A simpler but equivalent axiom is 
that our space contains at least one line on which there are more than three points. 

t Barycentriecher Calcul, Section ii, Chap. vi. 

i Math. Annalen, 4, 6, 7 , 37 ; Vorletmngen iiher nicht-Euklidische Geometric , 
Gottingen, 1893, Vol. i, p. 308 ff. 

|| In what follows, only involutions with real double points are in question. 

§ Op. cit. §§ 6, 6, 7. Pieri’s method was presumably suggested by von Staudt 
Cf, Geometric der Lage, § 16: especially No. 216. 



380 Space [chap, xlv 

in mind that, in projective Geometry, the points of a line do not 
have an order to begin with.) This projective order is obtained as 
follows. 

367. Given any three different points a, b y c on a line, consider the 
class of points a: such that a and r, b and x are each harmonic conjugates 
with respect to some pair of points y y y — in other words, a and c y 
b and x are pairs in an involution whose double points are y, y . Here 
y y y are supposed variable : that is, if any such points can be found, 
x is to belong to the class considered. This class contains the point i, 
but not a or c. Let us call it the segment ( abc ). Let us denote tfye 
relation of b to x ( a and c being fixed) by f)Q ao x. Then Qae is sym- 
metrical, and also bQacX implies aQ fl3 c. We have here a relation of 
four points, from which, as we saw in Part IV, Chapter xxiv, an order 
will result if certain further axioms are fulfilled. Three such axioms are 
required, and are given by Fieri as follows. 

(1) If d is on the line ab, but does not belong to the segment (aftc), 
and does not coincide with a or with r, then d must belong to the 
segment ( bca ). (If d coincides with r, we know already that d belongs 
to the segment (bca). This case is therefore excluded from the axiom 
to avoid a superfluity of assumptions.) In virtue of this axiom, if a , 
b y c, d be distinct points on a line, we must have either bQ a( d or cQat/i . 
It follows that we must have either bQ a< d or aQ^d. Thus at least two 
Q-relations hold between any four distinct collinear points. (2) If 
u 9 by c be distinct collinear points, and d be a point belonging to both 
the segments (bca) and (cab) y then d cannot belong to the segment (abc). 
That is, of the three segments to which d may belong, it never belongs 
to more than two. From this and the previous axiom it results that, if 
d be distinct from a, b and r, then d belongs to two and only two of 
the three segments defined by a, b and c. (3) If a, by c be distinct 
collinear points, and d a point, other than 6, of the segment (abc) y and 
e a point of the segment (adc), then e is a point of the segment (abc). 
(Here again, the condition that d is to be other than b is required only 
to avoid superfluity, not for the truth of the axiom.) In terms of Q y 
this axiom states that bQ a< jd and dQa# imply bQa^e; that is, Q^ is 
transitive. We saw already that Q ae is symmetrical. We can now 
prove that, by means of this relation, all points of the line except a 
and c are divided into two classes, which we may call (ac) x and ( ac ) 9 . 
Any two points in the same class have the relation any two in 
different classes have not. The division into two classes results from 
the fact that, if we do not have hQajly nor yet dQat£ (6, d, e being points 
other than a and c), then we do have bQ nd e. That is to say, Qae bas 
the formal properties of sameness of sign, and divides the line into 
two classes, just as sameness of sign divides numbers into positive and 
negative. 

The opposite of Qacy which I shall denote by T aey corresponds in like 



366, 367] Projective Geometry 387 

manner to difference of sign. T ae is not to denote the mere negation 
of Qae* but the fact of belonging to different segments. That is, bT ^jd 
means that d does not coincide with a or r, that d lies in the line or, 
but not in the segment (ah*). Then bT a( d may be taken as meaning 
that b and d are separated by a and c. It is a relation which has the 
formal properties of separation of couples, as enumerated in Part IV, 
Chapter xxiv. If «, b , r, d 9 e be five distinct points in one straight line, 
we have the following properties of the Y’-relation. (1) bT a( d is 
equivalent to dT ac b , aT^Cy cT bd a, etc. (2) We have one and 

only one of the three relations aT^l, aT M c , a T cd b. (8) dT a J) implies 
dT ac e or t'TJb*. 

By comparing the above properties of T with those of separation 
of couples, it will be seen that T leads to a closed series (in the sense of 
Part IV), i.e. to a series in which there is a first term, but this first 
term is arbitrary. The definition of the generating relation of the 
series (which involves, as in the general case, three fixed points) is 
given by Pieri as follows. With regard to the natural order abc y a 
precedes every other point of the line; r precedes every point d not 
belonging to (ah) and not coinciding with a or c, i.e. every point d 
such that dT ac b ; a general point d precedes a general point e if dQ^b 
and eQ ad c, or if dTJb and eT ad c y i.e. if d belongs to the segment (abc) 
and e to the segment (cud) y or if b and d are separated by a and r, and 
likewise c and e by a and d. It is then shown, that of any two points 
of the line, one precedes the other, and that the relation is transitive 
and asymmetrical ; hence all the points of the line acquire an order. 

Having now obtained an order among our points, we can introduce 
an axiom of continuity, to which Pieri f gives a form analogous to that 
of Dedekind’s axiom, namely : If any segment ( al>c ) be divided into 
two parts h and A, such that, with regard to the order ah\ every 
point of h precedes every point of k, while h and k each contain at 
least one point, then there must be in (abc) at least one point ,r such 
that every point of (cdx) which precedes a- belongs to A, and every point 
of (abc) which follows ,r belongs to k. It follows from this axiom that 
every infinite class contained in (ah ) and having no last (or first) term 
has a limit, which is either a point of (ah ) or c (or a ) ; and it is easy to 
prove that, when h and k are given, there can be only one such point as 
.r in the axiom. 

By means of the projective segment, it is easy to define triangles and 
tetrahedra. Three points determine four triangles, which between them 

* 111 is last property affords an instance (almost the only one known to me) 
where Peirce’s relative addition occurs outside the Algebra of Relatives. “dT ac e or 
eT^h” is the relative sum of T ae and T acy if d t e, and b be variable. This property 
results formally from regarding T ut as the negation of the transitive relation 

t Op. fit. § 9, p. 7. 



388 


Space [chap, xlv 

contain all the points of the plane, and have no common points except 
the angles. Also we can define harmonic transformations, and prove 
their properties without any further axiom*. Only one other axiom 
is required to complete our Geometry, namely : A plane and a line not 
in the plane always have a common point. This amounts to the axiom 
of three dimensions. Nothing is altered, in what precedes, by denying 
it, and proceeding to a space of n dimensions or of an infinite number 
of dimensions. This last, in fact, requires fewer axioms than a spade of 
three dimensions f. I 

368. I^et us now resume the other direction in which projective 
Geometry may be developed, in which we start from three fixed points 
on a line, and examine all the points obtainable from these three by 
successive quadrilateral constructions. We do not here, as in the 
development we have been examining, require any new axiom ; but 
there is a corresponding restriction in the results obtainable. In order 
to give projective Geometry its fullest possible development we must 
combine the results of both directions. 

Confining ourselves, to begin with, to one straight line, let us see 
how to construct a net and introduce projective coordinates. Denoting 
by a/fftcd, as before, the proposition 44 a and d are harmonic conjugates 
with respect to b and c, r ' we can, bv the quadrilateral construction, when 
a, 6, c are given, determine the only point d satisfying this proposition. 
We next construct the point e for which bH^, then f for which dH ee f, 
g for which eH^g, and so on. In this way we obtain a progression of 
points on our line, such that any three consecutive points, together with 
c, form a harmonic range. With our former definition of a segment, 
all these points will belong to the segments ( abc ) and ( bca ). We may 

number these points, beginning with a, 0, 1, 2, ..., n, Since c 

does not belong to the progression, we may assign to it the number oo }. 
Consider next the points obtained as follows. Let d f be such that 
d' H ab Cj let e'Had'b, f'H^d ' , and so on. We have thus a new progression 
of points, such that any three consecutive points together with a form 
a harmonic range, and all belonging to the segments (abc), (cab). To 
these points let us assign the numbers 1/n in order. Similarly we can 
construct a progression belonging to the two segments (cab), (fca), and 
assign to them the negative integers. By proceeding in a similar 
manner with any triad of points so obtained, we can obtain more and 
more points. The principle adopted in assigning numbers to points 
(a principle which, from our present standpoint, has no motive save 

* These developments will be found in Pieri, loc. cit . §§ 8, 10. 

t Fieri, § 12. 

} We must not assign to c the definite number o>, since we cannot assume, without 
further axioms, that c is the limit of our progression. Indeed, so long as we exclude 
Pieri's three axioms above mentioned, we do not know, to begin with, that c has any 
ordinal relation to the terms of our progression. 



867 - 869 ] Prqjective Geometry 889 

convenience) is the following: if p , 9 , r be the numbers assigned to 
three points already constructed, and # he the number to be assigned 
to the harmonic conjugate (supposed not previously constructed) of the 
9 -point with respect to the p-point and the r-point, then we are to 

have ^ — - /— — — 1. In this manner, we can find one and only one 
r — 9 / r — tt 

point of our line for each rational number, positive or negative*. 
Thus we obtain a denumerable endless compact series of points on 
our line. Whether these are all the points of our line or not, we 
cannot decide without a further axiom. If our line is to be a con- 
tinuous series, or a collection of the power of the continuum, we must 
of course assume points not obtainable by quadrilateral constructions, 
however often repeated, which start with three given elements. But 
as the definition of our space is optional, we may, if we like, content 
ourselves with a rational space, and introduce an axiom to the effect 
that all points of our line can be obtained from three given points. 

369. Before proceeding further, it may be well to point out a 
logical error, which is very apt to be committed, and has been com- 
mitted, I think, even by Klein f. So long as PierTs three axioms above 
enumerated are not assumed, our points have no order but that which 
results from the net, whose construction has just been explained. Hence 
only rational points ( i.e . such as, starting from three given points, have 
rational coordinates) can have an order at all. If there be any other 
points, there can be no sense in which these can be limits of series of 
rational points, nor any reason for assigning irrational coordinates to 
them. For a limit and the series which it limits must both belong 
to some one series ; but in this case, the rational points form the whole 
of the series. Hence other points (if there be any) cannot be assigned 
as limits of series of rational points. The notion that this can be done 
springs merely from the habit of assuming that all the points of a line 
form a series, without explicitly stating this or its equivalent as an 
axiom. Indeed, just as we found that series of rationals properly have 
no limit except when they happen to have a rational limit, so series 
of points obtainable by the quadrilateral construction will not have 
limits, qua terms of the series obtained from the quadrilateral con- 
struction, except where they happen to have a limit within this series, 
i.e . when their coordinates have a rational limit. At this point, there- 
fore, it is highly desirable to introduce PierTs three axioms, in virtue of 
which all the points of a line have an order. We shall find that, in 
the natural order cab, the order of the rational points, resulting from 
PierTs axioms, is the same as that of their coordinates assigned on the 

* On this subject, see Klein, Vorlexungen //Tier nicht- Euklidimhe Geonutfrie, 
p. 338 ff., where proofs will lie found. 

t e.g. Op. cit. p. 344. 



390 


Space [chap, xlv 

above principle*. Thus we have only to assume that all infinite series 
of rational points have limits, as parts of PierPs series, arfd that all 
points are either rational or limits of rational series, in order to show 
that our straight line has continuity in Cantor s sense. In this case we 
shall assign to non -rational points the irrational numbers corresponding 
to the series which such points limit. 

370. Returning now to the quadri lateral construction, we define as 
the anharmonu: ratio of four points whose coordinates are p, g, r, ,v 

the number ^ / — — - . It can be shown that this number is in- 

r-g/ r - s 

dependent of the choice of our three original points a, 6 , c. It expresses 
the series of quadrilateral constructions required to obtain ,v when p 9 
g, r are given, and thus expresses a purely projective relation of the four 
points. By the introduction of irrational points, in the manner just 
explained, it follows that any four points on a line have an anharmonic 
ratio. (This cannot possibly lx? proved without PierPs three axioms or 
some equivalent to them.) The anharmonic ratio is unaltered by any 
linear transformation, i.e. by substituting for every point x the point 
whose coordinate is (our- h 0)/(yx + 8), where a, 8, 7 , 8 are any fixed 
numbers such that olS — /3y is not zero. From this point we can at 
last advance to what was formerly the beginning of projective Geometry, 
namely the operation of projection, to which it owes its name. 

It can be shown that, if p , r be harmonic conjugates with respect to 
g, 8> and p 9 g, ?*, & be joined to some point o, and if op, oq, or, os meet 
any line in //, g', r , s\ then p\ r are harmonic conjugates with respect 
to q\ s'. Hence we can show that all anharmonic ratios are unaltered 
by the above operation. Similarly if l be any straight line not coplanar 
with jxjrs, and the planes i Ip, Iq , /r, Is meet any line not coplanar with 
l hi p , g', r', s , these four points will have the same anharmonic ratio 
as /A «v. These facts are expressed by saying that anharmonic 

ratio is unaltered by projection. From this point we can proceed to 
the assignment of coordinates to any point in space f. 

371. To begin with a plane, take three points a, c not in one 
straight line, and assign coordinates in the above manner to the points 
of ab, or. Let p be any point of the plane ah', but not on the line 
Then if cp meets ah in p l% and bp meets cu' in p 2 , and x, y are the 
coordinates of p 2 respectively, let (.r, y) be the two coordinates of p. 
I 11 this way all points of the plane not on be acquire coordinates. To 
avoid this restriction, let us introduce three homogeneous coordinates, 
as follows. Take any four points a, b , r, e in a plane, no three of 
which are collinear; let ae meet be in be meet ca in e 29 ve meet ab 

* This lias the one exception that r came last in the order of the quadrilateral 
constructions, and comes first in Pieri’s order. This may be remedied by the simple 
device of giving e the coordinate - 00 instead of cc . 

t See I’asch, Nrnrre Geometric, § 22 ; Klein, Math. Anmhn, ;)7. 



369 - 372 ] Prqjectivc Geometry 891 

in e 9 . Assign coordinates to the points of 6c, ra, ab as before, giving 
the coordinate 1 to c,, c 2 , c 8 , and in ab giving 0 to «, and oo to 6, and 
similarly for the other sides. In place of the single coordinate x of any 
point of 6c, let us introduce the homogeneous coordinates x 9y where 
x — x 9 jx 9 . If now p be any point of the plane «6c, let op meet be in p ly 
bp meet ca in p t9 and cp meet ab in yv Let x 2y x s be the homogeneous 
coordinates of y/,, x iy x l those of p 2 ; then x J9 x 2 will be those of 
Hence we may assign x ly x 9y x 9 as homogeneous coordinates of p. In 
like manner we can assign four homogeneous coordinates to any point 
of space. We can also assign coordinates to the lines through a point, 
or the planes through a line, or all the planes of space, by means of the 
anharmonic ratios of lines and planes f. It is easy to show that, in 
point-coordinates, a plane has a linear equation, and a linear equation 
represents a plane; and that, in plane-coordinates, a point has a linear 
equation, and a linear equation represents a point. Thus we secure all 
the advantages of analytical Geometry. From this point onwards, the 
subject is purely technical, and ceases to have philosophic interest. 

372. It is now time to ask ourselves what portions of the Geometry 
to which we are accustomed are not included in projective Geometry. In 
the first place, the series of points on a line, being obtained from a 
four-term relation, is closed in the sense of Part IV. That is, the order 
of points requires three fixed points to be given before it can be defined. 
The practical effect of this is, that given only three points on a line, 
no one of them is between the other two. This is a definite difference 
between projective space and Euclidean or hyperbolic space. But it is 
easy to exaggerate this difference. We saw in Part IV that, wherever 
a series is generated by a two-term relation, there is also the four-term 
relation of separation of couples, by which we can generate a closed 
series consisting of the same terms. Hence in this respect the difference 
does not amount to an inconsistency. Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces 
contain what projective space contains, and something more besides. 
We saw that the relation by which the projective straight line is defined 

has the formal properties of “P or P" where P is transitive and asym- 
metrical. If the said relation be actually of this form, we shall have 
an open series with respect to P, and of three col linear points one will 
be l>etween the other two. It is to be observed that, where the straight 
line is taken to be essentially closed, as in elliptic space, ft etween must \w 
excluded where three points only are given. Hence elliptic space, in 
this respect, is not only consistent with the projective axioms, but 
contains nothing more than they do. 

It is when we come to the plane that actual inconsistencies arise 

* See Pasch, ioc. cit . 

f The auharmonic ratio of four lines through a point or of four planes through a 
line is that of the four points in* which they meet any line. 



392 


Space [chap- xlv 

between projective Geometry and Euclidean or hyperbolic Geometry. 
In projective space, any two lines in a plane intersect ; in the Euclidean 
and hyperbolic Geometries, this does not occur. In elliptic Geometry, 
any two lines in a plane intersect; but in the antipodal form they 
intersect twice. Thus only the polar form wholly satisfies the projective 
axioms. Analogous considerations apply to the intersection of two 
planes, or of a line and a plane. These differences render the projective 
definition of a plane inapplicable to Euclidean and hyperbolic spaces, 
and render the theory of these spaces far more complicated than that of 
projective space. I 

Finally, in metrical Geometry it is assumed either that two pbints 
have a quantitative relation called distance, which is determined when 
the points are given, or that stretches satisfy axioms in virtue of which 
their divisibilities become numerically measurable. In this point, even 
elliptic space differs from projective space, though the difference is of 
the nature of an addition, not an inconsistency. But this matter cannot 
be discussed until we have examined metrical Geometry, when we shall 
be in a position to examine also the projective theory of distance to 
more advantage than is at present possible. 

373. A few words may be added concerning the principle of duality. 
This principle states, in three dimensions, that the class of planes is also 
a projective space, the intersection of two planes being, as before, the 
straight line, and the intersection of three non-collinear planes taking 
the place of the point. In n dimensions, similarly, a projective space 
results from all sub-classes of (?/ — 1) dimensions. Such a duality, as we 
saw in Chapter xuv, belongs always to u-dimensional series as such. It 
would seem (though this is only a conjecture) that projective Geometry 
employs the smallest number of axioms from which it is possible to 
generate a series of more than two dimensions, and that projective 
duality therefore flows from that of dimensions in general. Other 
spaces have properties additional to those required to make them 
a -dimensional series, and in other spaces, accordingly, duality is liable 
to various limitations. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 


DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY. 

374. The subject which I have called descriptive Geometry is not, 
as a rule, sharply distinguished from projective Geometry. These two 
terms, and the term “Geometry of Position,” are commonly used as 
synonyms. But it seems improper to include in projective Geometry 
any property which is not unaltered by projection, and it is by the 
introduction of one such property that I wish to detine the subject of 
the present chapter. We have seen that, in projective space, three 
points on a line are not such that a definite one of them is between the 
other two. The simplest possible proposition involving between , in 
projective Geometry, requires four points, and is as follows: “If fl, 
A, e be distinct collinear points, and d is on ac, but does not belong 
to the segment (abc), nor yet coincide with a or c, then, with regard to 
the order abc , c is between b and d.” When we reflect that the definition 
of the segment (abc) involves the quadrilateral construction— which 
demands, for its proof, a point outside its own plane, and four pairs 
of triangles in perspective — we shall admit that the projective method 
of generating order is somewhat complicated. But at any rate the 
ordinal propositions which result are unaltered by projection. The 
elementary sense of between , on the contrary, which is to be introduced 
in the present chapter, is in general not unaltered by projection*. 

In descriptive Geometry, we start, as before, with points, and as 
before, any two points determine a class of points. But this class now 
consists only of the points between the two given points. What is to 

* The present subject is admirably set forth by Pasch, Neuere Geometrie, Leipzig, 
1882, with whose empirical pseudo-philosophical reasons for preferring it to pro- 
jective Geometry, however, 1 by no means agree (see Einleitung and § 1). It is 
carried further, especially as regards the definition of the plane, by Peano, 
I Principii di Geometria logkamente eepoeti, Turin, 18111). For the definition of the 
whole line by means of its various segments, see Peano’s note in Rinata di 
Matematim, ii, pp. 68-62. See also his article “Sui fondamenti della Geometria," 
ib. iv, p. 51 ff., and Vailati, “ Sui Principi fondamentali della Geometria della retta," 
Riv. d. Mat. ii, pp. 71-75. Whatever, in the following pages, is not controversial, 
will be found in the above sources. 



394 


Space [chap, xlvi 

be understood by between is not explained by any writer on this subject 
except Vailati, in terms of a transitive asymmetrical relation of two 
points; and Vailati’s explanation is condemned by Peano*, on the 
ground that between is a relation of three points, not of two only. 
This ground, as we know from Part IY ; , is inadequate and even ir- 
relevant. But on the subject of relations, even the best mathematicians 
go astray, for want, 1 think, of familiarity with the Logic of Relations. 
In the present case, as in that of projective Geometry, we may start 
either with a relation of two points, or with a relation between a pair 
and a class of points : either method is equally legitimate, and leads to 
the same results, but the former is far simpler. I^et us examine first 
the method of Pasch and Peano, then that of V ailati. \ 

375. We start, in the former method, with two indefinables, point , 
and between . If r/, ft, e be three' points, and c is between a and ft, we 

say that c is an nb , or belongs to the class of points ah. Professor 

Peano has enumerated, with his usual care, the postulates required as 
regards the class ab\. In the first place, the points a and ft must be 
distinct, and when they are so, there always is a point between them. 
If v is between a and ft, it is also Indween ft and a : a itself (and there- 
fore ft) is not between a and ft. We now introduce a new definition. 
If a, ft be any two distinct points, then nb is the class of all points c 
such that ft is between a and e. Similarly ft 7/ will be the class of 

points (l such that a is between ft and d. We then proceed to new 

postulates. If a and ft be distinct points, db must contain at least one 
point. If a 9 ft,, r, d be points, and v is between a and r/, ft between a 
and r, then ft is between a and d. If ft and c be between a and (/, ft is 
between a and r, or identical with r, or between v and d. If e 9 d belong 
to a'ft, then either e and d are identical, or c is between ft and d y or d 
is betw een ft and c. If ft is between a and r, and c is between ft and d , then 
r is between a and d. This makes in all nine postulates with regard to 
fo’twecn. Peano confesses J that he is unable to prove that all of them 
are independent: hence they are only shown to lx* sufficient, not necessary. 
The complete straight line (nb) i% defined as ba and a and ab and ft 
and tt'ft; that is, (1) points between which and ft the point a lies; 
(2) the point a; (3) points between a and ft; (4) the point ft; (5) points 
between which and a the point ft lies. 

Concerning this method, we may observe to begin with that it is 
very complicated. In the second place, we must remark, as before, that 
the phrase “two points determine a class of points” must lx expanded 
as follows: “There is a certain specific relation A', to whose domain 
belongs every couple of distinct points. K is a many-one relation, and 
the relatum, corresponding to a couple of points as referent, is a class of 
points.” In the thin! place, we may observe that the points of the 


* Hir. di Mat. iv, p. 62. 


t lb. iv, p. .55 ff. 


% lb. p. 62. 



374 - 376 ] Descriptive Geometry 395 

line only acquire order by relation to vie segments which they terminate, 
and that these acquire order by the relation of whole and part, or 
logical inclusion. Let a, 6 be any two points, and consider the class 
of points ab or b or ab. Let r, d be any two distinct points of this 
class. Then either ac is a proper part of ad, or ad is a proper part 
of ac. Here ac and ad may be called segments, and we see that segments 
whose origin is a and whose limits belong to ab or b or ab form a series 
in virtue of the transitive asymmetrical relation of whole and part. By 
correlation with these segments, their extremities also acquire an order; 
and it is easy to prove that this order is unchanged when we substitute 
for a any point of ah'. But the order still results, as it always must, 
from a transitive asymmetrical relation of two terms, and nothing is 
gained by not admitting such a relation immediately between points. 

376. Passing now to what I have called Vailati’s theory, we find 
a very great simplification. We may state the present theory (which 
is not in every detail identical with that of Vailati) as follows. There is 
a certain class, which we will call K , of transitive asymmetrical relations. 
Between anv two points there is one and only one relation of the class K. 

If R be a relation of the class A", R is also a relation of this class. 
Every such relation R defines a straight line ; that is, if a, b be two 
points such that uRh^ then a belongs to the straight line p. (I use the 
corresponding Greek letter to denote the domain of a relation ; thus 
if S be a relation, a is the class of terms having the relation S to some 
term or other.) If aRb , then there is some point c such that aRc and 
cRb ; also there is a point d such that bRd. Further, if a, h lx* any two 
distinct points belonging to p, then either aRb or hRu. With this 
apparatus we have all that we require. 

We may do well to enumerate formally the above definition of the 
class K , or rather the postulates concerning its members — for K itself 
is not defined. I may remark to begin w ith that I define the field of a 
class of relations as the logical sum of the fields of the constituent 
relations ; and that, if K be the class, I denote its field by k. Then the 
axioms w r e require are as follows. 

(1) There is a class of relations A r , w hose field is defined to be the 
class point. 

(2) There is at least one point. 

If R be any term of K we have, 

(3) R is an aliorelative. 

(4) R is a term of K. 

(5) R=R. 

(6) p (the domain of R) is contained in p. 

(7) Between any two points there is one and only one relation 
of the class K. 

(8) If a, b be points of p, then either aRb or bRa. 



300 


Space [chap, xlvi 

The mutual independence of these axioms is easy to see. But let 
us first briefly sketch the proof that they give all the required results. 
Since there is, by (2), at least one point, and since by (1) this point 
has some relation of the class A', and since by (3) all relations of the 
class K are aliorelatives, it follows that there is some term, other than 
the one point, to which this one point has a relation R of the class K. 
But since R y by (4), is a relation of the class A”, it follows that the term 
to which the one point is so related is also a point. Hence there are 
at least two distinct points. Let a, 6 be two distinct points, and let 
R be the one relation of the class K between a and b. Thus we have 
aRb. But we do not have bRa, for if we did, since /?* = /?, by \(5), 
we should have aRa, which contradicts (3). Thus R and R are always 
different, i.e. each is asymmetrical. Since R 2 = J7, aRb and bRc imply 
aRc 9 i.e. R is transitive. Hence the points which have to a the relation 
R or R 9 together with a itself, form a series. Since R = R *, aRb implies 
that there is some point c such that uRc y cRb ; i.e. the series generated 
by R is compact. Since, by (6), p is contained in p, aRb implies that 
there is some point c such that bRc. Applying the same argument 
to Ry there is a point d such that dRa. Thus we have p = p, and the 
field of R has no beginning or end. By (8), the field of R is 
what, in Part IY r , we called a connected series, that is, it does not 
fall apart into two or more detached portions, but of any two of its 
terms one is before and the other after. By (7), if there be more than 
one relation of the class A', the fields of two such relations cannot, 
unless one is the converse of the other, have more than one point 
in common. The field of one relation of the class K is called a 
.straight line ; and thus (7) assures us that two straight lines have at 
most one common point, while (8) assures us that, if ab 9 cd be the same 
line, so are ac and bd. Thus it is proved that our axioms are sufficient 
for the geometry of a line, while (7) goes beyond a single line, but is 
inserted here because it does not imply the existence of points outside 
a single line, or of more than one relation of the class K. It is most 
important to observe that, in the above enumeration of fundamentals, 
there is only one indefinable, namely K y not two as m Peano’s system. 

377 . With regard to the mutual independence of the axioms, it 
is to be observed that (1) is not properly an axiom, but the assumption 
of our indefinable K. (2) may obviously be denied while all the others 
are maintained. If (3) be denied, and R be taken to be the symmetrical 
relation of projective Geometry, together with identity with some term 
of p, we obtain projective Geometry, which is different from the present 
system, but self-consistent. If (4) be denied, all the rest can be main- 
tained ; the only difficulty is as regards (7), for if aRb y and R is not 
a term of A", b will not have to a any relation of the class A", unless 
indeed it has one which is not R % which seems to be not contradictory. 



37fr-379] Descriptive Geometry 397 

As regards (5), we may deny either that R is contained in if*, or that /?* 
is contained in R. To deny the former makes our series not compact, to 
which there is no logical objection. The latter, but not the former, is 
false as regards angles*, which can be made to satisfy all the other axioms 
here laid down. (6) will become false if our lines have last terms : thus 
the space on the left of a plane, together with this plane, will satisfy 
all the axioms except (6). As regards (7), it is plainly independent 
of all the rest ; it consists of two parts, (a) the assertion that between any 
two points there is at least one relation of the class A", (6) the assertion 
that there is not more than one such relation between two given points. 
If we consider a Euclidean and a hyperbolic space together, all the 
axioms will be true except (a). If we combine two. different classes A',, K % 
of relations of the above kind, such that k\ = h iy ( b ) alone will be false. 
Nevertheless it seems plain that (b) cannot be deduced from the other 
axioms. As regards (8), it alone is false if we take for K the class of 
directions in Euclidean space, in which a set of parallel lines all have 
the same direction. Thus the necessity of all except one of our axioms 
is strictly proved, and that of this one is highly probable. 

378. We saw that the above method enabled us to content ourselves 
with one indefinable, namely the class of relations K. But we may go 
further, and dispense altogether with indefinables. The axioms con- 
cerning the class K were all capable of statement in terms of the logic 
of relations. Hence we can define a class C of classes of relations, such 
that every member of C is a class of relations satisfying our axioms. 
The axioms then become parts of a definition, and we have neither 
indefinables nor axioms. If if be any member of the class C, and 
k be the field of A r , then k is a descriptive space, and every term of 
k is a descriptive point. Here every concept is defined in terms of general 
logical concepts. The same method can be applied to projective space, 
or to any other mathematical entity except the indefinables of logic. 
This is, indeed, though grammatically inconvenient, the true way, 
philosophically speaking, to define mathematical notions. Outside logic, 
indefinables and primitive propositions are not required by pure mathe- 
matics, and should therefore, strictly speaking, not be introduced. This 
subject will be resumed in Chapter xux. 

379. The two ways of defining the straight line — that of Pasch and 
Peano, and that which I have just explained — seem equally legitimate, 
and lead to the same consequences. The choice between them is 
therefore of no mathematical importance. The two methods agree in 
enabling us, in terms of two points only, to define three parts of a 
straight line, namely the part before a ( b'a ), the part between a and b 
(ab) y and the part after b (a'b). This is a point in which descriptive 
Geometry differs from projective Geometry : there we had, with respect 


* See Part IV, chap. xxiv. 



398 


Space [chap, xlvi 

to a and 6, only two segments of the straight line ab , and these could 
not be defined without reference to another point c of the line, and 
to the quadrilateral construction. 

The straight line may be regarded either as the class of points 
forming the field of a relation R, or as this relation itself. For 
the sake of distinction, it will be well to call the relation R a ray 9 since 
this word suggests a sense; R will then be the opposite ray. In 
considering a number of lines all passing through one point 0, it will 
be well to give the name of ray also to the class of points to which 
O has some relation R , lx. to those points of a line through O which 
lie on one side of O. Those on the other side of O will then be the 
opposite ray. The context will show in which sense the word is used. 

380. I come now to the plane . Easy as it is to define the plane 
in projective space, its definition when the line is not a closed series, 
or rather, when we wish to call coplanar some pairs of lines which 
do not intersect, is a matter of some difficulty. Pasch * takes the plane, 
or rather a finite portion of the plane, as a new indefinable. It is, 
however, capable of definition, as, following Peano, I shall now show. 

We need, to begin with, some new axioms. First, if p be any 
straight line, there is at least one point not belonging to p. Next, 

if a, b, c be three points not in one straight line, and d be a point 

of be between b and c, e a point of ad between a and d, then be will meet 
ac in a pointy/* and e will be between b and f, f between a and c. Again, 
«, 6, r, d being as before, if /‘be a point between a and c, then ad and bf 
will intersect in a point e between a and d and between b and y*+. We 
now define what may be regarded as the product (in a geometrical sense) 
of a point and a figure. If a be any point, and k any figure, ak is to 
denote the points which lie on the various segments between a and the 
points of k. That is, if p lie any point of fc, and x any point of the 
segment ap, then x belongs to the class ak. This definition may be 

applied even when a is a point of A;, and A: is a straight line or part 

of one. The figure ak will then be the whole line or some continuous 
portion of it. Peano now proves, by purely logical transformations, 
that, if «, b, c lie distinct non-collinear points, a (&r) = b (ac). This 
figiire is called the triangle abr 9 and is thus w r holly determined by its 
three defining points. It is also shown that, if p , q be points of the 
segments ab, ae respectively, the segment / xj is wholly contained in 
the triangle ab . After some more theorems, we come to a new' defini- 
tion. If a be a point, and k any figure (i.c. class of points), ak is 
to denote all the points between which and a lies some point of k , that 
is, as Peano remarks, the whole shadow r of k if a be an illuminated 
point. Thus if a , b , c be non-col linear points, a {be) will represent the 
•class of points beyond be and bounded by ab, ac produced. This 


* tty. dt. § 2. 


t Rtv. di Mat. iv, p. G4. 



S99 


379-382] Descriptive Geometry 

enables us to define the plane (ah) as consisting of the straight lines 
h, ca, at), the triangle ah’, and the figures a'h c, b'ca , c ab, tic a , cdb, 
a'b'c*. It is then easy to show that any other three points of the plane 
define the same plane, and that the line joining two points of a plane 
lies wholly in the plane, lint in place of the proposition that any two 
lines in a plane intersect, we have a more complicated proposition, 
namely : If a , b , c, d be coplanar points, no three of which are 
collincar, then either the lines ah , cd intersect, or tu\ hi do so, or 
ad, h‘ do so. 

381. Having successfully defined the plane, we can now advance 
to solid Geometry. For this we need, to begin with, the axiom : 
Given any plane, there is at least one point outside the plane. We 
can then define a tetrahedron exactly as we defined a triangle. But 
in order to know that two planes, which have a point in common, 
have a line in common, we need a new axiom, which shows that the 
space we are dealing with has thrc*e dimensions. In projective space, 
this axiom was simply that a line and a plane always have at least one 
point in common. But here, no such simple axiom holds. The following 
is given by Peano (foe. cit. p. 74) : If /; be a plane, and a a point 
not on p , and b a point of dp ( i.e . a point such that the segment ab 
contains a point of p, or, in common language, a point on the other 
side of the plane from a), then if x be any point, cither x lies on the 
plane, or the segment ax contains a point of the plane, or else the 
segment bx contains a point of the plane. By adding to this, finally, 
an axiom of continuity, we have all the apparatus of three-dimensional 
descrip ti ve Geometry -f\ 

382. Descriptive Geometry, as above defined, applies equally to 
Euclidean and to hyperbolic space : none of the axioms mentioned 
discriminate between these two. Elliptic space, on the contrary, which 
was included in projective Geometry, is here excluded. It is impossible, 
or rather, it has hitherto proved so, to set up a general set of axioms 
which will lead to a general Geometry applying to all three spaces, 
for at some point our axioms must lead to either an open or a closed 
series of points on a line. Such a general Geometry can be constructed 
symbolically, but this results from giving different interpretations to 
our symbols, the indefinables in one interpretation being definable in 
another, and vice versa. This will become plain by examining the method 

* The figure b’(c'a), or t/c’a, represents the angle between ha and ca both 
produced, as may be seen from the definition. 

t I confine myself as a rule to three dimensions, since a further extension has 
little theoretic interest. ITtree dimensions are far more interesting than two, 
liecause, as we have seen, the greater part of projective Geometry — i.e. everything 
dependent upon the quadrilateral construction — is impossible with less than three 
dimensions, unless the uniqueness of the quadrilateral construction be taken as an 
axiom. 



400 Space [chap, xlvi 

in which projective Geometry is made applicable to the space above 
defined, which, for want of a better name, I shall call descriptive space. 

383. When we try to apply projective Geometry to descriptive spate, 
we are met by the difficulty that some of the points required in a construc- 
tion may not exist. Thus in the quadrilateral construction, given three 
points a, 6, c, the fourth point d may not exist at all. We can prove as 
before that, if it exists, it is unique, and so with other projective proposi- 
tions : they become hypothetical, since the construction indicated is not 
always possible. This has led to the introduction of what are called 
ideal elements (points, lines and planes), by means of which it beeonies 
passible to state our projective theorems generally. These ideal elements 
have a certain analogy to complex numbers in Algebra — an analog}' 
which in analytical Geometry becomes very close. Before explaining 
in detail how these elements are introduced, it may be well to state the 
logical nature of the process. By means of the points, lines and planes 
of descriptive Geometry, we define a new set of entities, some of which 
correspond ( i.e . have a one-one relation) to our points, lines and planes 
respectively, while others do not. These new entities' we call ideal 
points, lines and planes ; and we find that they have all the properties 
of projective points, lines and planes. Hence they constitute a projec- 
tive space, and all projective propositions apply fo them. Since our 
ideal elements are defined by means of the elements of descriptive space, 
projective propositions concerning these ideal elements are theorems 
concerning descriptive space, though not concerning its actual points, 
lines and planes. Pasch, who has given the best account of the way in 
which ideal elements are to be defined*, has not perceived (or, at any 
rate, does not state) that no ideal point is an actual point, even where 
it has a one-one relation to an actual point, and that the same holds of 
lines and planes. This is exactly the same remark as we have had to 
make concerning rationals, positive numbers, real numbers, and complex 
numbers, all of which are supposed, by the mathematician, to contain 
the cardinals or the ordinals, whereas no one of them can ever be 
one of the cardinals or ordinals. So here, an ideal element is never 
identical with an actual point, line or plane. If this be borne in niind, 
the air of magic which surrounds the usual expositions disappears. 

384. An ideal point is defined as follows. Consider first the class of 
all the lines passing through some point, called the vertex. This class 
of lines is called a sheaf of lines ( Strahle n b ii ridel ). A sheaf so defined 
has certain properties which can be stated without reference to the 
vertex -f. Such are, for example, the following: Through any point 
(other than the vertex) there is one and only one line of the sheaf ; and 
any two lines of the sheaf are coplanar. All the properties of a sheaf, 

* Op. cit. §§ fi-H. 

t These are enumerated by Killing, Grundlagen der Geometric, Vol. n (Paderborn, 
1898), p. 82. 



884, 885] Descriptive Geometry 401 

which can be stated without reference to the vertex, are found to belong 
to certain classes of lines having no vertex, and such that no two of 
the class intersect. For these a simple construction can be given, as 
follows*. Let Z, m be any two lines in one plane, A any point not in 
this plane. Then the planes Al , Am have a line in common. The class of 
such lines, for all possible points A outside the plane Zw, has the properties 
above alluded to, and the word sheaf is extended to all classes of lines 
so defined. It is plain that if Z, rn intersect, the sheaf has a vertex ; 
if not, it has none. Thus, in Euclidean space, all the lines parallel to 
a given line form a sheaf which has no vertex. When our sheaf has no 
vertex, we define an ideal jnrint by means of the sheaf. But this must 
not be supposed to be really a point : it is merely another name for the 
sheaf itself, and so, when our sheaf 'has a vertex, if we are to make 
propositions in which ideal points occur, we must substitute the sheaf 
for its vertex. That is, an ideal point is simply a sheaf, and no sheaf h 
an actual point. 

Concerning sheaves of lines we may observe the following points. 
Any two straight lines in one plane uniquely determine a sheaf. Two 
sheaves both having a vertex always determine a line, namely that 
joining the vertices, which is common to both sheaves. Three sheaves, 
of which one at least has a vertex, determine a plane, unless they are 
collinear. A line and a plane always have a common sheaf, and so have 
three planes of which two at least have a common point. 

385. Thus sheaves of lines have some projective properties, in 
relation to lines and planes, which are lacking to points. In order to 
obtain entities with further projective properties, we must, to begin 
with, replace our lines by ideal lines. For this purpose we must first 
define pencils of planes (axial pencils, Ebenenbiischel), An axial pencil 
consists, in the first instance, of all the planes through a given 
straight line, called the axis. But as in the case of sheaves, it is 
found that such a figure has many properties independent of the 
axis, and that these properties all belong to certain other classes of 
planes, to which the name of pencil is therefore extended. These 
figures are defined as follows +. Let A, B be two sheaves of lines. 
Let D be a point not on the line (if there be one) common to the two 
sheaves A , B . Then A, B y D determine uniquely a plane, which we 
may call ABD , or P (say). This will be the plane containing those 
lines of A and B that pass through D. Any other point E 9 not in the 
plane P, will determine a different plane ABE , or Q. The class of 
planes so obtained, by varying D or E, is a pencil of planes, and has all 
the properties of a pencil having a real axis, except those in which the 
axis is explicitly mentioned. Any two planes P and Q belonging to the 
pencil completely determine it. Moreover, in place of A and B above, 


* Pasch, op, cit. § 5. 


f Punch, op, cit, § 7. 



402 


Space [chap, xlvi 

we may substitute any other sheaves of lines A\ S', belonging to both 
P and Q. (A sheaf belongs to a plane when one of its lines lies in the 
plane.) Any two sheaves belonging to both P and Q will serve to 
define the pencil of planes, and will belong to every plane of the pencil. 
Hence if, in place of actual points, we substitute ideal points, i.e. sheaves 
of lines, every pencil of planes has an axis, consisting of a certain 
collection of sheaves of lines, any two of which define the pencil. This 
collection of sheaves is called an ideal line *. 

386. Substituting ideal points and lines for actual ones, we find 
that we have now made a further advance towards projective space. 
Two ideal points determine one and only one ideal line ; a given plane 
is determined by any three of its ideal points which do not belong to 
one ideal line, but three ideal points do not always determine a plane. 
Two ideal lines in a plane always have a common ideal point, and so 
have a plane and an ideal line. Also two planes always have a common 
ideal line, and three planes always have either a common ideal point or 
a common ideal line. The only point where our space is not strictly 
projective is in regard to planes. There is a plane through any two 
ideal points and one actual point, or through an ideal point and an 
actual line. If there is a plane at all through three non-collinear ideal 
points, or through an ideal line and an ideal point not on the line, then 
there is only one such plane ; but in some cases there is no such plane. 
To remedy this, we must introduce one more new class of entities, 
namely ideal planes. 

The definition of ideal planes f is comparatively simple. If Ay By C 
be any three ideal points, D an ideal point on the ideal line AB , and 
E on AC y then the ideal line DE has an ideal point in common with 
BCy whether there be an actual plane determined by Ay By C or not. 
Thus if By Cy D be any three ideal points, and E any other ideal point 
such that BDy CE intersect, then BC, DE intersect, and so do BEy CD. 
Hence, if By C, D be not coll inear, we define the ideal plane BCD as 
that class of ideal points E which are such that the ideal lines BDy CE 
intersect. 

For the sake of clearness, let us repeat this definition in terms of 
our original points, lines 'and planes, without the use of the word ideal. 
Given three sheaves of lines By Cy Dy which are not all contained in 
a common pencil of planes, let E be another sheaf of lines such that 
there is a sheaf of lines common to the two pencils of planes BDy CE. 
Then the class of all sheaves E satisfying this condition is called the 
ideal plane BCD. 

* For logical purposes, it is better to define the ideal line as the class of ideal 
points associated with a sheaf of planes, than as the sheaf itself, for we wish a line to 
be, as in projective Geometry, a class of points. 

t Pasch, op. tit. § 8. 



403 


385 - 387 ] Descriptive Geometry 

The usual properties of planes are easily proved concerning our new 
ideal planes, as that any three of their points determine them, that 
the ideal line joining two of their ideal points is wholly contained in 
them, and so forth. In fact, we find now that the new points, lines 
and planes constitute a projective space, with all the properties described 
in the preceding chapter. The elementary order of points on a line, 
with which we began, has disappeared, and a new order has to be 
generated by means of the separation of couples*. Thus all projective 
Geometry becomes available ; and wherever our ideal points, lines and 
planes correspond to actual ones, we have a corresponding projective 
proposition concerning the latter. 

387. I have explained this development at length, partly because 
it shows the very wide applicability of projective Geometry, partly 
because it affords a good instance of the emphasis which mathematics 
lays upon relations. To the mathematician, it is wholly irrelevant what 
his entities are, so long as they have relations of a specified type. It is 
plain, for example, that an instant is a very different thing from a point ; 
but to the mathematician as such there is no relevant distinction between 
the instants of time and the points on a line. So in our present in- 
stance, the highly complex notion of a sheaf of lines— an infinite class 
of infinite classes — is philosophically very widely dissimilar to the simple 
notion of a point. But since classes of sheaves can be formed, having 
the same relations to their constituent sheaves that projective lines and 
planes have to projective points, a sheaf of lines in descriptive space w, 
for mathematical purposes, a projective point. It is not, however, even 
for mathematical purposes, a point of descriptive space, and the above 
transformation clearly shows that descriptive space is not a species of 
projective space, but a radically distinct entity. And this is, for philo- 
sophy, the principal result of the present chapter. 

It is a remarkable fact, which the above generation of a projective 
space demonstrates, that if we remove from a projective space all the 
points of a plane, or all the points on one side of a closed quadrief, 
the remaining points form a descriptive space, Euclidean in the first 
case, hyperbolic in the second. Yet, in ordinary metrical language, the 
projective space is finite, while the part of it which is descriptive is 
infinite. This illustrates the comparatively superficial nature of metrical 
notions. 

* See Pasch, op. tit. § 9. 

+ For the projective definition of a surface of the second order (quadric) in a 
projective space cf. Reye, Geometrie der Luge (Hanover, 1808), Part ii. Lecture v. 
A quadric is closed if there are points not on it such that all straight lines through 
them cut the quadric. Such points are within the quadric. 



CHAPTER XLVII. 


METRICAL GEOMETRY. \ 

\ 

388. The subject of the present chapter is elementary Geometry, as 
treated by Euclid or by any other author prior to the nineteenth century. 
This subject includes the usual analytical Geometry, whether Euclidean 
or non-Euclidean ; it is distinguished from projective and descriptive 
Geometry, not by any opposition corresponding to that of Euclid and 
non-Euclid, but by its method and its indefinables. The question 
whether its indefinables can, or cannot, be defined in terms of those 
of projective and descriptive Geometry, is a very difficult one, which 
I postpone to the following chapter. For the present, I shall develop 
the subject straightforwardly, in a manner as similar to Euclid’s as 
is consistent with the requisite generality and with the avoidance of 
fallacies. Metrical Geometry is logically subsequent to the two kinds 
which we have examined, for it necessarily assumes one or other of 
these two kinds, to which it merely adds further specifications. I shall, 
as a rule, assume descriptive Geometry, mentioning projective Geometry 
only in connection with points in which it shows important metrical 
differences from descriptive Geometry. In the former case, all the first 
twenty -six propositions of Euclid will hold. In the latter, the first, 
seventh, sixteenth, and seventeenth require modification ; for these pro- 
positions assume, in one form or another, that the straight line is not 
a closed series. Propositions after the twenty-sixth— or, with a suitable 
definition of parallels, after the twenty-eighth— depend, with few ex- 
ceptions, upon the postulate of parallels, and are therefore not to be 
assumed generally. 

389. Since Euclid still has popularly, and even with mathematicians, 
a reputation for rigour, in virtue of which his circumlocution and long- 
windedness are condoned, it may be worth while to point out, to begin 
with, a few of the errors in his first twenty -six propositions *, To 
begin with the first proposition. There is no evidence whatever that 
the circles which we are told to construct intersect, and if they do not, 
the whole proposition fails. Euclid’s problems are often regarded as 

* Cf. Killing, op. cit. Vol. n, Section 5. 



388-390] Metrical Geometry 405 

existence-theorems, and from this point of view, it is plain, the as- 
sumption that the circles in question intersect is precisely the same 
as the assumption that there is an equilateral triangle on a given base. 
And in elliptic space, where the straight line is a closed series, the 
construction fails when the length of the base exceeds half the length 
of the whole straight line. As regards the second and third propositions, 
there is nothing to be said, except that they are not existence-theorems. 
The corresponding existence -theorem — i.e. on any straight line, in either 
direction from a given point on the line, there is a point whose distance 
from the given point is equal to a given distance — is equivalent to the 
postulate concerning the circle, and is thus prior to the second and 
third propositions. With regard to the fourth, there is a great deal 
to be said ; indeed Euclid’s proof is so bad that he would have done 
better to assume this proposition as an axiom*. As the issues raised 
by this proof are of great importance, both to mathematics and to 
philosophy y I shall set forth its fallacies at some length. 

390. The fourth proposition is the first in which Euclid employs 
the method of superposition — a method which, since he will make any 
detour to avoid itf, he evidently dislikes, and rightly, since it has no 
logical validity, and strikes every intelligent child as a juggle. In the 
first place, to speak of motion implies that our triangles are not spatial, 
but material. For a point of space is a position, and can no more 
change its position than the leopard can change his spots. The motion 
of a point of space is a phantom directly contradictory to the law of 
identity : it is the supposition that a given point can be now one point 
and now another. Hence motion, in the ordinary sense, is only possible 
to matter, not to space. But in this case superposition proves no 
geometrical property. Suppose that the triangle ABC is by the 
window, and the side AB consists of the column of mercury in a 
thermometer; suppose also that DEF is by the fire. Let us apply 
ABC to DEF as Euclid directs, and let AB just cover DE. Then 
we are to conclude that ABC and DEF \ before the motion, were equal 
in all respects. But if we had brought DEF to ABC • no such result 
would have followed. But how foolish ! I shall be told ; of course 
ABC and DEF are to be both rigid bodies. Well and good. But 
two little difficulties remain. In the first place — and for my opponent, 
who is an empirical philosopher, this point is serious — it is as certain as 
anything can be that there are no rigid bodies in the universe. In the 
second place — and if my opponent were not an empiricist, he would 
find this objection far more fatal — the meaning of rigidity presupposes 
a purely spatial metrical equality, logically independent of matter. For 

* This course is actually adopted, as regards the equality of the remaining angles, 
by Hilbert, Grundlagen der Geometrie (Festschrift zur Feier der Enthullung des 
Gauss-Weber Denkmals, Leipzig, 1899), p. 12. 

+ Cf. Killing, loc. cit. § 2. 



406 


Space [chap, xlvh 

what is meant by a rigid body ? It is one which, throughout a con- 
tinuous portion of time, preserves all its metrical properties unchanged. 
Hence we incur a most fatally vicious circle if we attempt to define 
metrical properties by rigidity. If a/3y be a material triangle, which 
occupies at one time the space ABC , at another the space A'B‘C\ to 
say that afiy is rigid means that, however the two times be chosen 
(within some assigned period), the triangles ABC y A'B'C' are equal in 
all respects. If we are to avoid this conclusion, we must define rigidity 
in some wholly non-geometrical manner. We may say, for example, 
that a rigid body means one which is made of steel, or of brass. But 
then it becomes a logical error to regard brass eternal as slave to mortal 
rage; and if we define equal spaces as those which can be occupied by 
one and the same rigid body, the propositions of metrical Geometry 
will be one and all false. 

The fact is that motion, as the word is used by geometers, has a 
meaning entirely different from that which it has in daily life, just as 
a variable, in mathematics, is not something which changes, but is 
usually, on the contrary, something incapable of change. So it is with 
motion. Motion is a certain class of one-one relations, each of which 
has every point of space for its extension, and each of which has a 
converse also belonging to the class. That is, a motion is a one-one 
relation, in which the referent and the relatum are both points, and 
in which every point may appear as referent and again as relatum. 
A motion is not this only : on the contrary, it has this further charac- 
teristic, that the metrical properties of any class of referents are identical 
with those of the corresponding class of relata. This characteristic, 
together with the other, defines a motion as used in Geometry, or 
rather, it defines a motion or a reflexion ; but this point need not be 
elucidated at present. What is clear is, that a motion presupposes the 
existence, in different parts of space, of figures having the same metrical 
properties, and cannot be used to define those properties. And it is 
this sense of the word motion , not the usual material sense, which is 
relevant to Euclid’s use of superposition. 

391. Returning now to Euclid’s fourth proposition, we see that 
the superposition of ABC on DEF involves the following assumptions. 

(1) On the line DE there is a point E y on either side of ZJ, such that 
DE = AB. This is provided for by the postulate about the circle. 

(2) On either side of the ray DE y there is a ray 1)F such that the 
angle EDF is equal to the angle BAC. This is required for the pos- 
sibility of a triangle DEF such as the enunciation demands, but no 
axiom from which this follows can be found in Euclid. The problem, 
to construct an angle EDF equal to BAC , does not occur till I. 23, 
and there I. 4 is used in the proof. Hence the present assumption 
must be added to Euclid’s axioms. It now follows that on DF there 
is a point F such that DF = A C. Hence the possibility of two such 



390 - 392 ] Metrical Geometry 407 

triangles as the enunciation demands is established. But in order to 
prove that DEF is equal in all respects to ABC 9 we need a further 
axiom, namely : With one angle at Z>, one side along the ray l)E , and 
the other side to the right (or left) of I)E , there exists a triangle which 
is equal in all respects to the triangle ABC *. This is, in fact, the 
exact assumption which is concealed in the method of superposition. 
With this assumption, it finally becomes possible to prove that DEF 
is the triangle satisfying the above conditions and equal in all respects 
to ABC . 

The next remark concerns I. 6. Here Euclid first employs an axiom 
of which he is wholly unconscious, though it is very essential to his 
system, namely : If ()A y OB 9 OC be three rays which meet a straight 
line not passing through O in A 9 B 9 C respectively, and if B be between 
A and C, then the angle A OB is less than the angle AOC. This axiom, it 
will be seen, is not applicable in projective space, since it presupposes 
that the line is not a closed series. In I. 7, if this proposition is to 
apply to hyperbolic space, we require further the axiom : If three non- 
intersecting lines in one plane meet two lines in A , /?, C ; A 9 B\ C\ 
respectively; and if B be between A and C ; then B' is l>etween A 
and C\ Also it may be observed that Euclid gives no definition of the 
two sides of a line, a notion which again presupposes that the straight 
line is not a closed series. And with regard to angles, I. 7 requires 
sufficient axioms to show that they are a series of the kind explained 
in Part IV, Chapter xxiv ; or else we must assume the descriptive axiom 
of the last chapter, to the effect that, if A, B 9 C, D be coplanar points, 
no three of which are collinear, there is a point common to the stretches 
AB 9 CD 9 or to AC\ BD , or to AD 9 BC. All these assumptions will be 
found implicit in I. 7, as may be seen by attempting a symbolic proof 
in which no figure is used. 

Similar remarks apply to I. 16. In I. 12 it is assumed that a circle 
must meet a line in two points, if at all. But enough has been said to 
show that Euclid is not faultless, and that his explicit axioms are very 
insufficient. I^et us, then, make an independent examination of metrical 
Geometry. 

392. Metrical Geometry is usually said to be distinguished by the 
introduction of quantity. It is sufficient for the characterization of 
metrical Geometry to observe that it introduces, between every pair of 
points, a relation having certain properties in virtue of which it is 
numerically measurable — i.e. such that numbers can be given a one-one 
correspondence with the various relations of the class in question. The 
class of relations is called distance , and will be regarded, though this is 
not strictly necessary, as a class of magnitudes. Some of the properties 
of distance are as follows. 


* See Pasch, op. cit. § 13, (iruiulsatz ix. The whole § is excellent. 



408 


Space [chap, xlvii 

(1 ) Every pair of points has one and only one distance. 

(2) Distances are symmetrical relations. 

(3) On a given straight line through a given point, there are two 
and only two points at a given distance from the given point. 

(4) There is no maximum distance. 

(5) The distance of a point from itself is zero* * * § . 

(6) There is no minimum to the distance between distinct points. 

(7) If d, 8 be two given distances, and A 0 , A u A. 2 , ... A n , be 

distinct points on a straight line, whose distances one from the next are 
all 8, then for some value of n 9 A 0 A n is greater than d. \ 

(8) If A 0 , A n be any two points, there exist w — 1 distinct points 
(whatever integer n may be) on the straight line A 0 A n , such that the 
distances of each from the next, of A 0 from the first, and of A n from 
the last, are all equal f. 

393 . It may be observed that, if we admit the axiom that the whole 
is greater than the part, the properties (1), (4), (5) and (6) belong to 
stretches, while (2) becomes admissible by abstracting from the sense of 
a stretch. With regard to the remaining properties, (3), (7) and (8), 
there is nothing in descriptive Geometry to show whether or not they 
belong to stretches. Hence we may, if we choose, regard these three 
properties as axioms regarding stretches, and drop the word distance 
altogether. I believe that this represents the simplest course, and, as 
regards actual space, the most correct. At the same time, there is no 
contradiction in regarding distances as new relations distinct from 
stretches*. If we identify distance and stretch, what distinguishes 
metrical from descriptive Geometry is primarily the three additional 
axioms (3), (7) and (8), applied to a new indefinable, namely, the 
magnitude of divisibility of a stretch. This is not properly a notion of 
pure mathematics, since it cannot be derived from our original apparatus 
of logical notions. On the other hand, distance is not indefinable, being 
a class of one-one relations with certain assignable properties. On this 
point either course is logically permissible, but only distance can be 
introduced into pure mathematics in the strict sense in which’ the word 
is used in this work. 

The above axioms are required for showing that all distances are 
numerically measurable in terms of any standard distance §. It is not 
necessary that distances should be magnitudes, or even relations; all 
that is essential is that distances should form a series with certain 
properties. If the points of a line form a continuous series, then 

* See Part III, Chap. xxn. 

t Further properties of distance will he added later on. 

J Stretches are, of course, not properly relations ; but this point is irrelevant in 
the present discussion. 

§ See Part IV, ('hap. xxxi. 



392 - 394 ] Metrical Geometry 409 

distances do so also, in virtue of (3) ; thus all signless real numbers will 
be required for their measurement, 

394 . Assuming that distance and stretch are distinct, it may be 
asked whether distances do not suffice for generating order on the 
straight line, without the need of anv asymmetrical transitive relation of 
points. This represents, I think, the usual view- of philosophers; but 
it is by no means easy to decide whether it represents a tenable view. 
It might perhaps be thought that (2) might be dropped, and distance 
regarded as an asymmetrical relation. So long as we confine our 
attention to one line, this view seems unobjectionable. But as soon as 
we consider the fact that distances on different lines may be equal, w'e 
see that the difference of sense between AB and BA is not relevant to 
distance, since there is no such difference between distances on different 
lines. Thus if CD be a distance on another line, CD may Ik* equal both 
to AB and BA , and hence AB and BA must be equal, not opposite, 
distances. And the same thing may be made evident by considering 
a sphere. For this certainly consists of points at a given distance from 
the centre ; and thus points at opposite ends of a diameter must have 
the same distance from the centre. Distance, then, is symmetrical ; but 
it does not follow that the order on a line cannot be generated by 
distance. Let A , B be given points on a line, and let C, C Ik* two points 
on AB whose distances from A are equal, and less than AB. If we now 
set up the axiom that either BC or BC is less than AB, while the other, 
BC or BC, is greater than AB, we shall, I think, after some further 
axioms, be able to generate order without any other relation than distance. 
If A, B, C be three collinear [joints such that the distances AC, CB 
are both less than AB, then we shall say that C is between A and B. 
If A, B, C be points such that AC', AB are both less than BC, then 
we shall say that A is Ixtwcen B and C'. If, finally, A, B, C" be 
points such that AB, BC" are both less than AC", we shall sav that B 
is Ixtween A and C" . It remains to see whether, as the generation of a 
series requires, one of these always happens. Let A, B, C lx* any three 
collinear points. First suppose, if possible, that the distances AB, BC, 
CA are all equal. This case is not excluded by anything hitherto 
assumed ; we require, therefore, the further axiom that, if AB, BC lx 
equal, AC is not equal to either of them ; and I think it will be prudent 
to assume that AC is greater than either. Thus the case of two equal 
distances and one less than either is excluded. Of the three distances 
AB, BC, AC, therefore, one must lx the greatest : let this be AC. 
Then in virtue of the definition, B will he between A and C. But our 
difficulties are not at an end. For we require further that any point 
between A and B shall be between A and C ; and that, if A be between 
D and C, B shall be between D and C. With regard to the first 
point, if E be between A and B, A E and EB are less than AB, and 
therefore less than AC. But nothing assures us that EC is less than 



410 


Space [chap, xlvii 

AC . For this purpose we need a new axiom, which will be just what we 
set out to prove, namely : If AE , EB be both less than AB , and AB, 
BC be both less than AC\ then EC is less than AC . Finally, to prove 
that, if A be between I) and C, and B between A and C, then B is 
between D and C. Here DA, AC are less than DC, and AB, BC are 
less than AC. Hence BC is less than DC ; but nothing proves BD less 
than DC. For this we shall need a new axiom, and then at last our order 
w'ill be definite. But the proems, as is evident, is extremely complicated. 

395 . Moreover we still need a method of defining the straight line. 
Fieri has shown, in an admirable memoir* * * § , how to deduce metrical 
geometry by taking point and motion as the only indefinables. In § 390, 
w f e objected to the introduction of motion, as usually effected, on the 
ground that its definition presupposes metrical properties; but Piteri 
escapes this objection bv not defining motion at all, except through the 
postulates assumed concerning it. The straight line joining two points 
is the class of points that are unchanged by a motion which leaves the 
two points fixed. The sphere, the plane, perpendicularity, the order of 
points on a line, etc. are easily defined. This procedure is logically 
unimpeachable, and is probably the simplest, possible for elementary 
geometry. But we must now return to the consideration of other 
suggested systems. 

There is a method, invented by I^eibnizt and revived by Frischauf J 
and Peano§, in which distance alone is fundamental, and the straight 
line is defined by its means. In this method distances are given 
to begin with as a class of relations which are the field of a certain 
transitive asymmetrical relation (greater and smaller) ; if we assume this 
relation to be continuous, distances will be measurable; all distances 
have the same domain and the same converse domain, namely all the 
points of the space in question ; the locus of points equidistant from two 
fixed points is called a plane , and the intersection of two non-coincident 
planes, when it is not null, is called a straight line. (The definition of 
the straight line given by Peano|| is as follows : The straight line ah is 
the class of points x such that any point y, whose distances from a and h 
are respectively equal to the distances of x from a and h, must be coinci- 
dent with a*.) Leibniz, who invented this method, failed, according to 
Couturat, to prove that there are straight lines, or that a straight line is 
determined by any two of its points. Peano has not, so far as I am 
aware, succeeded in proving either of these propositions, but it is of 
course possible to introduce them by means of axioms. Frischauf 
professes to demonstrate them, but his proofs are very informal, and it 

* Delta geometria element are coma xixtema ipotetiro deduttiro , Turin, 18JM). 

+ IT. C outurat, La Ixtgique dr Jjeibnix, Paris, 1901, ('hap. ix, esp. p. 420. 

I Absolute Geometrie narh Johann Bolyai, An hang. 

§ Actmdemia Rente delle Scienxe di Torino , ]J)02-tf, “ La iieoinetria basata sulle 
idee di puuto e distanza.” || /«*. rit. 



394 - 397 ] Metrical Geometry 411 

is difficult to know what axioms he is assuming. In any case, however, 
the definitions prove that, by a sufficient use of axioms, it is possible to 
construct a geometry in which distance is fundamental, and the straight 
line derivative. The method is so complicated as to be not practically 
desirable ; but its logical possibility is nevertheless important. 

396 . It is thus plain that the straight line must be independent 
of distance, while distance may be independent of the straight line. 
Taking both as symmetrical relations, we can, by a very complicated 
series of axioms, succeed in generating order on the straight line and 
in explaining the addition and measurement of distances. But this 
complication, in most spaces*, is logically unnecessary, and is wholly 
avoided by deriving distances from stretches. We now start, as in 
descriptive Geometry, with an asymmetrical transitive relation by which 
the straight line is both defined and rfhown to be a series. We define as 
the distance of two points A and B the magnitude of divisibility of the 
stretch from A to B or B to A — for divisibility is a signless magnitude. 
Divisibility being a kind of magnitude, any two distances will be equal 
or unequal. As with all divisibilities, the sum 'of the divisibilities of 
AB and EF is the divisibility of the logical sum of the classes AB and 
EF, provided these classes have no common part. If they have a common 
part, we substitute for EF a stretch E F' equal to it and having no 
part in common with AB. The difference of the distances AB , EF 
(supposing AB the greater) is the divisibility of a stretch CD which, 
added logically to EF , and having no part in common with EF y 
produces a stretch equal to AB. It follows at once that, if A, B, C be 
coll inear, and B be between A and C,AB+BC = AC and AC — AB = BC. 
No further axiom is required for these propositions. For the proposition 
that, if AB=AB, and CD=CD’, then AB + CD = AH' + CD', we 
require only the general axiom, applicable to all divisibilities, that the 
sums of equals are equal. Thus by the help of the axioms (3), (7), (8) 
above, we have everything that is required for the numerical measure- 
ment (theoretically speaking) of all distances in terms of any given 
distance, and for the proof that change of unit involves multiplication 
throughout by a common factor. 

397 . With regard to magnitude of divisibility, in the sense in 
which this is relevant to metrical Geometry, it is important to realize 
that it is an ordinal notion, expressing a property of relations, not of 
their fields. We wish to say that a stretch of two inches has twice as 
much divisibility as a stretch of one inch, and that an area is infinitely 
more divisible than a stretch. Now, if we are dealing (as will l>e 
assumed in this discussion) with a continuous space, every stretch, area 
or volume is a class of 2*® terms ; and considered as a class, it is the field 
of an infinite number of relations beside that (or those) belonging to it 

* Die only exceptions known to me are finite spaces of two dimensions. See 
Chap. xux. 



412 


Space [chap, xlvii 

in respect of the space we are considering. The habit of allowing the 
imagination to dwell upon actual space has made the order of points 
appear in some way intrinsic or essential, and not merely relative to 
one of many possible ordering relations. But this point of view is not 
logical : it arises, in regard to actual space, only from the fact that the 
generating relations of actual space have a quite peculiar connection 
with our perceptions, and, through the continuity of motion, with time. 
From the standpoint of logic, no one of the relations having a given field 
has any preeminence, and the points of actual space, like any other class 
of terms, form, with regard to other sets of generating relations, 
other sorts of continuous spaces — indeed any other continuous sp^ce, 
having any finite number of dimensions, or even &> dimensions, can be 
formed of the points of a Euclidean space by attending to other 
generating relations. 

From this it follows that magnitude of divisibility, if it is to 
distinguish a long stretch from a short one, or an area from a stretch, 
must be a property of the relations involved, not of the class of points 
composing the area or the stretch. It is not quite easy to define the exact 
property which is required ; for any two stretches are ordinally similar. 
We require some sense for the equality or inequality of the relations 
whose fields are the given stretches. Where coordinates (i.e. a corre- 
lation of the points of a line with the real numbers) have been already 
introduced, we may define the magnitude of a stretch as the difference 
of the coordinates of its end-points or its limits (according as the stretch 
has ends or not) ; but if this is done, the magnitudes of stretches will 
depend upon the necessarily more or less arbitrary plan upon which we 
have introduced our coordinates. This is the course adopted in the 
projective theory of distance — a course which has the merit of making 
metrical Geometry a logical development from projective axioms alone 
(see next chapter). The other course that may lx? adopted is, to 
assume that the generating relations of any two stretches have either a 
symmetrical transitive relation (equality), or an asymmetrical transitive 
relation or its converse (greater or less). Certain axioms will lx? required, 
as, for example, that if the points A, B , C, 1) are collinear, and AC is 
greater than Al) y then BC is greater than B1J*. The relations of equal, 
greater and less may l>e regarded as defined by these axioms, and the 
common property of the generating relations of those stretches that are 
equal to a given stretch may be defined as the magnitude of divisibility 
of the said generating relations. The sense in which an area has 
infinitely more divisibility than a stretch is that, if n be any finite 
integer, and n stretches equal to a given >trctch be removed from an 
area, there always remains an area, however great n may be. What is 
important to observe, in the above discussion, is that the logical parity 

* Stretches are here regarded as having sign, so that, if AC is greater than AIK 
CA is less than DA. 



397 , 398 ] Metrical Geometry 413 

of all the orders of which a class of terms is capable makes it necessary 
to regard the magnitudes with which metrical Geometry deals as 
belonging to relations or classes of relations, not, as is commonly 
supposed, to the class of points forming their fields. 

398 . In elliptic space, where the straight line is a closed series, 
the attempt to make distance independent of stretch leads to still 
further complications. We now no longer have the axiom that, if 
A , /?, C be collinear, we cannot have AB = BC = CA ; and we have to 
recognize two distances between every pair of points, which, when 
distance is taken as fundamental, becomes extremelv awkward. We 
may however avoid admitting two distances by refusing to regard the 
greater of the two as properly a distance. This will then be only a 
stretch. If two distances are admitted, one is always greater than the 
other, except in a limiting case, when both are the lower limit of the 
greater distances and the upper limit of the lesser distances. Further 
if a, b , c, d be any four distinct points, the greater of the two distances 
ah is always greater than the lesser of the two distances cd. Thus the 
whole class of greater distances may be banished, and only greater 
stretches be admitted. 

We must now proceed as follows. Distances are a class of sym- 
metrical relations, which are magnitudes of one kind, having a maximum, 
which is a one-one relation whose field is all points, and a minimum, 
which is the distance of any point from itself. Every point on a given 
line has a given distance other than the maximum or minimum from 
two and only two other points on the line. If «, 6, c, d l>e four distinct 
points on one line, we shall say that a and c are separated by b and d in 
the following four cases, of which (1) and (2) and also (3) and (4) are 
not mutually exclusive : 

(1) If ah < ac . be < ac . ad > ac. 

(2) If ah <ac . be < ac . dc > ac. 

(3) If ab > ac . ad < ac . dc < ac. 

(4) If be > ac . ad < ac . dc < ac. 

We then need Vailatfs five axioms enumerated in Part IV, Chap, xxiv, 
in order to generate a closed series from the separation of couples so 
defined. Thus it is possible, though by a somewhat complicated process, 
to generate a closed series of points on a line by means of the symmetrical 
relation of distance. 

I shall not work out in further detail the consequences of this 
hypothesis in elliptic space, but proceed at once to the hypothesis 
that distances are the magnitudes of stretches. When the number of 
dimensions exceeds two, the polar form of elliptic space is merely 
projective space together with the necessary metrical axioms; the 
antipodal form is a space in which two antipodal points together have 
the properties of a single projective point. Neglecting the latter, to 



414 


Space [chap, xlvu 

which similar remarks will apply, I shall confine myself to the polar 
form. Since this is a projective space, every pair of points determines 
two segments on the line joining the points. The sum of these two 
segments, together with the two points, is the whole line, and therefore 
constant. It is an axiom that all complete straight lines have the same 
divisibility. The divisibility of either segment is a distance between 
the two points : when the two distances are equal, either may be called 
the distance ; when they are unequal, it will be convenient to call the 
smaller the distance, except in special problems. The whole theory then 
proceeds as in the case of descriptive space. But it is important to 
observe that, in elliptic space, the quadrilateral construction and\ the 
generation of order, being prior to stretches, are prior to distances, Vnd 
are presupposed in metrical Geometry. , 

399. So far, therefore, metrical Geometry introduces three new 
axioms, and one new indefinable. The stretch in every series is 
a quantity, and metrical Geometry merely introduces such axioms as 
make all stretches of points measurable. A few words may be useful 
as to the sense in which, in a theoretical discussion, the word measurement 
is to be understood. The actual application of the foot-rule is here 
not in question, but only those properties of pure space which are 
presupposed in the use of the foot-rule. A set of magnitudes is theo- 
retically measurable when there is a one-one relation between them and 
some or all numbers; it is pr actually measurable when, given any 
magnitude, we can discover, with a certain margin of error, what the 
number is to which our magnitude has the relation in question. But 
how we are to discover this is a subsequent question, presupposing that 
there is such a proposition to be discovered, and soluble, if at all, 
by empirical means to be invented in the laboratory. With practical 
measurement, then, we are not at all concerned in the present dis- 
cussion. 

400. I come now to a more difficult question than distance, namely 
the question as to the definition of angle . Here, to begin with, we 
must deal with rays, not with whole straight lines. The ray may 
be taken either as an asymmetrical relation, or as the half-line on 
one side of a given point on a line. The latter usage is very convenient, 
and I shall frequently employ it. Elementary Geometry assumes that 
two rays starting from the same point determine a certain magnitude, 
called the angle between them. This magnitude may, however, be 
defined in various ways. In the first place, we must observe that, 
since the rays in a plane through a point form a closed series, every 
pair of rays through a point defines two stretches of rays. Of these, 
however, one stretch contains the opposites of both rays, while the other 
stretch contains the opposites of neither — except, indeed, in the one 
case where the two rays are each others opposites. This case is met 
by Euclid’s postulate that all right angles are equal — a postulate, 



398 - 401 ] Metrical Geometry 416 

however, which is now known to be demonstrable*. Omitting this 
case, the angle between two rays may be defined as that stretch of rays 
through their intersection which is bounded by the two rays and^oes 
not contain the opposite of either, i.e. if A, B be the rays, and A, B 
their opposites, the angle is the class of rays C which are separated 
from A or B by A and 1 3. We might also, but for an objection to 
be mentioned shortly, define the angle as all the points on such rays. 
A definition equivalent to this last, but simpler in form, and avoiding 
the mention of the opposite rays, is the following +. I^et a, ft be any 
two points of the rays A , /?, and let c be any point ot the stretch oft. 
Then the class of points r, for all possible positions of a and ft on their 
respective rays, is the angle between A and B. That is, every pair 
of intersecting rays divides the plane of the rays into two parts: the 
part defined as above is the angle. Or rather, the part so defined is the 
angle as a quantity : the angle as a magnitude is the divisibility of 
this part. But to these latter definitions we shall find fatal objections, 
and we shall find it necessary to adhere to the definition as a stretch 
of rays. 

401. Thus angle, like distance, is not a new indefinable, but like 
distance, it requires some new axioms. The angle ljetween a ray A 
and its opposite A ' cannot be defined as above, but may be defined 
as the logical sum of the angles between A and B , B and A ' respectively. 
This limiting angle is greater than any other at the point, being in fact 
the whole half of the plane on one side of the straight line AA\ If the 
angles between A and B , B and A ' are equal, each is called a right 
angle. (That there are such angles, can be proved if we assume 
continuity.) Two intersecting straight lines make four angles, which 
are equal in pairs. The order of a collection of rays through a point 
in a plane may be obtained by correlation with the points where these 
rays intersect a given straight line, provided there is any straight line 
which all of them intersect. But since rays through a point in a plane 
form a closed series, while the points on a line do not, we require a 
four-term relation for the former order. The following definition seems 
adequate. Given four rays OA , OB, OC, OD through a point O and 
in one plane, if these all meet a certain straight line in A, B, C, D 
respectively, and A and C are separated by B and 1), then OA and OC 
are said to be separated by OB and OD . In projective space this 
suffices. But in descriptive space we must provide for other cases. 
Thus if OA, OB % OC meet the given line, and B is between OA and OC, 
while OD does not meet the given line, then OA and OC are again 
said to be separated by OB and OD. If, finally, OA' and OB be the 

* See e.g. Killing, op. <*t. Yol. n, p. 171. A strict proof will be found iu 
llilbert, op. cit. p, 16. 

t Killing, op. fit. n, p. 160. 



416 


Space [chap, xlvii 

opposites of OA and OB, then OA and OA' are separated by OB 
and OB'. In virtue of the descriptive axioms of the preceding chapter, 
the order among the rays so obtained will be unambiguous, i.e. in- 
dependent of our choice of the line ABC, and will cover all cases. 

But now we need axioms analogous to those which, in the case 
of distance, were numbered (3), (7) and (8). At any given point in 
a given ray, there must be, in a given plane, two and only two rays, 
on opposite sides of the given ray (i.e. separated from each other 
by the given ray and its opposite), which make a given angle with 
the given rav; and angles must obey the axioms of Archimedes ind 
of linearity. But in addition to these axioms, which insure that angles 
shall be numerically measurable, we must have some method of con- 
necting the measure of angles with that of distances, such as is required 
for the solution of triangles. Does this require a new axiom ? Euclid 
appears to obtain this, by means of I. 47, II. 12, and II. 13, without 
any fresh axiom. For this result we depend upon the propositions on 
the congruence of triangles (I. 4, 8, 26), which demand only, as we saw, 
the axiom that, with one angle at a given point, and one side along 
a given ray through that point, there exist two and only two triangles 
in a given plane through the ray (one on each side of the given ray), 
which are equal in all respects to a given triangle. Thus it would seem 
that no fresh axioms are required for angles in a plane. 

402 . With regard to the definition of an angle as a portion of 
a plane, it is necessary (as in many other cases), if w'e retain this 
definition, somewhat to restrict the axiom that the whole is greater than 
the part. If a whole A has two parts B , C, which together constitute 
A y and if C be infinitesimal with respect to A , then B will be equal 
to A. This case occurs in a plane under the following circumstances. 
Ix?t O, O' be any two points, OP, O'P' lines in one plane and making 
equal angles with the ray OO'*. Then in Euclidean or hyperbolic space 
these lines OP, O'P' wdll not intersect ; thus the angle between OO' and 
O'P' will be part of the angle O'OP. Hence the above restriction 
is necessary as regards the axiom that the whole is greater than the part. 

In Euclidean space this answer is sufficient, since, if OP makes 
w’ith OO' a less angle than OP' does, OP and O' P will intersect. But 
in hyperbolic space, OP and O'P* may not intersect even then. Hence 
if we adhere to the above definition of angle, we shall have to hold that 
the whole may be less than the part. This, however, is intolerable, and 
shows that the definition in question must be rejected. We may, how- 
ever, still regard angle as the stretch of rays ; for the rays in the angle 
at O' are not part of the rays in the angle at O. Hence it is only 
as a stretch of rays, or as the magnitude of such a stretch, that an angle 
can be properly defined. 

* The angle between the rays 0(7, (fl* is what Euclid would call the angle 
between 0(Y produced and (YP. 



401 - 404 ] Metrical Geometry 417 

As showing, in a curious manner, the increased power of deduction 
which results from the above axioms concerning distances and angles, 
we may remark that the uniqueness of the quadrilateral construction, 
which before could not be proved without three dimensions, can now 
be proved, as regards all constructions in one plane, without any 
assumption of points outside that plane. Nothing is easier than to 
prove this proposition by the methods of elementary coordinate Geometry. 
Thus although projective Geometry, as an independent science, requires 
three dimensions, any projective proposition concerning plane figures 
can he metrically proved, if the above axioms hold, for a two-dimensional 
space. 

403 . As regards figures of three dimensions, angles between planes 
and solid angles can be defined exactly as rectilinear angles were defined. 
Moreover fresh axioms will not be required, for the measurement of such 
angles can be deduced from the data we already possess. 

With regard to areas and volumes some remarks seem necessary. 
Areas and volumes, like angles, are classes of points when taken as 
quantities, and divisibilities when taken as magnitudes. For areas 
and volumes we do not require afresh the axioms of Archimedes and 
of linearity, but we require one axiom apiece to give a criterion of 
equal areas and volumes, i.c. to connect their equality with that of 
distances and angles. Such an axiom is supplied, as regards areas, by 
the axiom that two congruent triangles have the same area, and as 
regards volumes, bv the corresponding axiom concerning tetrahedra. 
But the existence of congruent tetrahedra, like that of congruent 
triangles, demands an axiom. For this purpose, Pasch* gives the 
following general axiom : If two figures are congruent, and a new 
point be added to one of them, a new point can be added to the other 
so that the two new figures are congruent. This axiom allows us to 
infer congruent tetrahedra from congruent triangles ; and hence the 
measurement of volumes proceeds smoothly. 

404 . In three dimensions, a curious fact has to be taken account of, 
namely, the disjunction of right and left-handedness, or of clockwise 
and counter-clockwise. This fact is itself of a descriptive nature, and 
may be defined as follows. Between two non-coplanar rays, or l)etween 
four non-coplanar points taken in an assigned order, there is always one 
of two opposite relations, which may be called right and left. The 
formal properties of these relations have been explained in Part IV 

for the present I am concerned with their geometrical consequences. 
In the first place, they cause volumes to become magnitudes with sign, 
in exactly the way in which distances on a straight line have sign when 
compounded with their sense. But in the case of distances, since not 
all are on one straight line, we could not thus compound distance and 
sense generally : we should require, for a compound, some more general 

* Op . cit. p. 109. 



418 


Space [chap. XLvn 

notion than sense, such as vectors supply. Here, on the contrary, since, 
in a three-dimensional space, all volumes have one or other of two 
senses, the compound can be made for all volumes. Thus if the volume 
of the tetrahedron abed has one sign, that of bacd will have the opposite 
sign. This is the familiar geometrical fact that the determinant giving 
the volume of a tetrahedron abed has one or other sign according as the 
sense of abed is the same as or different from that of OXYZ , where 0 is 
the origin and X , V, Z any positive points on the axes. It is this fact, 
also, which gives signs to angular momentum in Dynamics. The pm- 
portance of the fact (which itself seems to Ire an independent axiom) 
is this, that it makes a distinction between two figures whose metrical 
properties are all identical. It is this distinction which puzzled Kant, 
who, like most of his contemporaries, supposed all geometrical facts to 
be metrical. In itself, the fact would Ire no more puzzling than the 
distinction between the stretches AB and BA , which are metrically 
indistinguishable. But it becomes puzzling when metrical equality is 
supposed to result from motion and superposition. In our former 
definition of motion (§ 390) we omitted (as was then observed) a con- 
dition essential to its definition. Not only must two congruent figures Ire 
metrically equal, but there must be a continuous series of equal figures 
leading from the one to the other. Or, what amounts to the same 
thing, if a, b , c, d and a, //, r', d' Ire homologous non-coplanar points 
in the two figures, the tetrahedra abed, a'b'c'd' must have the same sense. 
In the case of equal and opposite tetrahedra, these conditions fail. For 
there is no gradual transition from clockwise to counter-clockwise ; thus 
at some point in the series a sudden jump would Ik* necessary. No 
motion will transform abed into a tetrahedron metrically equal in all 
respects, but with the opposite sense. In this fact, however, there 
seems, to my mind, to Ire nothing mysterious, but merely a result of 
confining ourselves to three dimensions. In one dimension, the same 
would hold of distances with opposite senses; in two dimensions, of 
areas. It is only to those who regard motion as essential to the notion 
of metrical equality that right and left-handedness form a difficulty ; in 
our theory, they are rather a confirmation than a stumbling-block. 

With this we may end our brief review of metrical Geometry, leaving 
it to the next chapter to discuss its relation to projective Geometty and 
the projective theory of distance and angle. 



CHAPTER XLYIII. 


RELATION OF METRICAL TO PROJECTIVE AND 
DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY. 

405. In the present chapter I wish to discuss two questions. First, 
can projective and descriptive Geometry be established without any 
metrical presuppositions, or even without implying metrical properties ? 
Secondly, can metrical Geometry be deduced from either of the others, 
or, if not, what unavoidable novelties does it introduce ? The previous 
exposition has already dogmatically assumed certain answers to these 
questions, but we are now to examine critically the various possible 
answers. 

The distinction between projective and descriptive Geometry is very 
recent, and is of an essentially ordinal nature. If we adopt the view — 
which, as we saw, is the simpler of two legitimate views — that the 
straight line is defined by a certain relation between any two of its 
points, then in projective Geometry this relation is symmetrical, while 
in descriptive Geometry it is asymmetrical. Beyond this we have the 
difference that, in projective Geometry, a line and a plane, two planes, 
or two lines in a plane, always intersect, while in descriptive Geometry 
the question whether this is the case or not is left open. But these 
differences are not very important for our present purpose, and it will 
therefore be convenient to speak of projective and descriptive Geometry 
together as non-quantitative Geometry. 

The logical independence of non-quantitative Geometry is now 
scarcely open to question. We have seen, in Chapters xi.v and xi,vi, 
how it may be built up without any reference whatever to quantitative 
considerations. Quantity, in fact, though philosophers appear still to 
regard it as very essential to mathematics, does not occur in pure 
mathematics, and does occur in many cases not at present amenable 
to mathematical treatment. The notion which does occupy the place 
traditionally assigned to quantity is order ; and this notion, we saw, is 
present in both kinds of non-quantitative Geometry. But the purity 
of the notion of order has been much obscured by the belief that all 
order depends upon distance— a belief which, though it is entertained 
by so excellent a writer as Meinong, we have seen to be false. Distance 



420 


Space [chap, xlviii 

being essentially quantitative, to admit that series depend upon distance 
is to admit that order depends upon quantity. But this view leads at 
once to an endless regress, since distances have an order of magnitude, 
which would have to be derived from new distances of distances, and 
so on. And positively, an asymmetrical transitive relation suffices to 
generate a series, but does not imply distance. Hence the fact that 
the points of a line form a series does not show that Geometry must 
have metrical presuppositions, and no such presuppositions appear in the 
detail of projective or descriptive Geometry. 

406 . But although non -quantitative Geometry, as it now exists, is 
plainly independent of everything metrical, the historical development 
of the subject has tended greatly to obscure this independence. A brief 
historical review of the subject may tie useful in showing the relation of 
the more modem to the more traditional methods. 

In Euclid, and in Greek geometers generally, hardly any descriptive 
theorems are to be found. One of the earliest discoveries of an im- 
portant descriptive theorem was the one named after Pascal*. Gradually 
it was found that propositions which assert points to be col linear or 
lines to be concurrent, or propositions concerning tangents, poles and 
polars, and similar matters, were unaltered by projection ; that is, any 
such property belonging to a plane figure would belong also to the 
projection or shadow of this figure from any point on to any plane. 
All such properties (as, for instance, those common to all conics) were 
called projective or descriptive. Among these properties was anharmonic 
ratio, which was defined as follows. If A , ZJ, C, D be four points on 

AB 1 AD 

one straight line, their anharmonic ratio is ^ 0-4, OB , 

OC y OD be four lines through a point, their anharmonic ratio is 

8 "* n / S * n I n Chasles’s great work on descriptive Geometry, 

sm COB j sin COD & r 

and even in most recent works (such as Cremona’s projective Geometry), 
this definition will be found at a very early stage in the development of 
the subject, together with a proof that anharmonic ratio is unaltered by 
projection. But such a definition is itself metrical, and cannot therefore 
be used to found a subject independent of metrical Geometry. With 
other portions of what used to be called descriptive or projective 
Geometry, the same lack of independence will be found. Consider, 
for example, the definition of a conic. To define it as a curve of 
the second degree would require projeccive coordinates, which there 
was no known method of introducing. To define it as a curve meeting 
any straight line in not more than two points would require the dis- 
tinction of real and imaginary points, ror if we confine ourselves to 

* If a hexagon l>e inscribed in a conic, the three pairs of opposite sides intersect 
in collinear points. 



421 


405-407] Prqjectwe Theory of Metrics 

real points there are innumerable curves other than conics which satisfy 
the definition. But imaginary points arc, in ordinary metrical Geometry, 
imaginary coordinates, for which there is no purely geometrical inter- 
pretation ; thus without projective coordinates, our definition again fails. 
To define a conic as the locus of points P for which the anharmonic 
ratio of PA, PB, PC, PI) (where A, B, C\ I) are fixed points) is 
constant, again involves metrical considerations, so long as we have 
no projective definition of anharmonic ratio. And the same dependence 
upon metrical Geometry appears as regards any other projective or 
descriptive theorem, so long as the traditional order of ideas is 
adhered to. 

The true founder of non -quantitative Geometry is von Staudt*. It 
was he who introduced the definition of a harmonic range by means 
of the quadrilateral construction, and who rendered it possible, by 
repetitions of this construction, to give projective definitions of all 
rational anharmonic ratios f. These definitions indicate the succession 
of quadrilateral constructions required in order to obtain a fourth point 
from three given points ; thus, though they are essentially numerical, 
they have no reference whatever to quantity. But there remained one 
further step, before projective Geometry could be considered complete, 
and this step was taken by Fieri. In Klein’s account, it remains doubtful 
w hether all sets of four collinear points have an anharmonic ratio, and 
whether any meaning can be assigned to irrational anharmonic ratios. 
For this purpose, we require a method of generating order among all 
the points of a line. For, if there be no order but that obtained from 
Klein’s method, there is no sense in which we can regard a point not 
obtained by that method as the limit of a series of points which are so 
obtained, since the limit and the series which it limits must always both 
belong to some one series. Hence there will be no way of assigning 
irrational coordinates to the points which do not have rational co- 
ordinates. There is, of course, no projective reason for supposing that 
there are such points ; but there are metrical reasons, and in any case 
it is well, if possible, to Ik* able to deal protectively with a continuous 
space. This is effected by Fieri, with the help of certain new axioms, 
but without any new indefinables. Thus at last the long process by 
which projective Geometry has purified itself from every metrical taint 
is completed. 

407. Frojective Geometry, having achieved its own independence, 
has, however, embarked upon a career of foreign aggrandisement ; and 
in this we shall, I think, though on the whole favourable, be obliged 
to make some slight reservations. The so-called projective theory of 
distance aims at proving that metrical is merely a branch of projective 

* Geometric tier Isiyc , Nurnberg, 1847 ; Heitriige zur Geometrie der Luge, ib. 1850, 
1857, 1800. 

t This step, 1 believe, is due to Kleiu. See Math. Annalen , Vols. iv, vi, xxxvii. 



422 


Space 


[chap. XLvra 


Geometry, and that distances are merely logarithms of certain an- 
harmonic ratios. If this theory be correct, there is not a special 
subject of metrical Geometry, and the axioms by which, in the pre- 
ceding chapter, we distinguished this subject, must be consequences of 
projective axioms. Let as examine the manner in which this result 
iB obtained*. 

We have already seen how to assign coordinates to every point of 
a line in projective space, and how to define the anharmonic ratio of 
any four points. We have seen also how to obtain a projective from 
a descriptive space. In a descriptive space, when an ideal point has a 
real correlative (i.e. when it is a sheaf of lines which has a vertex)^ we 
assign to the real point the coordinate which belongs to the ideal point 
considered as belonging to a projective space. In this way, the coordinate 
Geometry of the two spaces becomes very similar, the difference being 
that, in projective space, every real set of coordinates gives a real point, 
whereas, in descriptive space, this holds of each coordinate only within 
certain limits (both of which limits are excluded). .In what follows, 
therefore, remarks concerning projective space will apply also to descrip- 
tive space except when the contrary is expressly stated. 

Let us consider the anharmonic ratios of all ranges axby , where a, b 
are fixed points and x, y variable points on our line. Let a, £, ft, // be 

the coordinates of these points. Then % — %. / ^ will be the an- 

£~P / V -P 

harmonic ratio of the four points, which, since a, ft are constants, may 
be conveniently denoted by (£17). If now f be the coordinate of any 
other point z, we have 

(CW (*«-(»)• 

Hence log (f n) + log (vt) = log (??). 

Thus the logarithm of the anharmonic ratio in question has one of the 
essential properties of distance, namely additiveness. If xy, yz, xz be 
the distances of x, y, z taken as having sign, we must have 


xy +yz = xz. 

We have also log (£ £ ) = 0 and log (£77) = — log (yt ), which are two further 
properties of distance. From these properties (of which the third follows 
from the other two) it is easy to show that all properties of distances 
which have no reference to the fixed points a, b belong to the logarithm 
in question. Hence, if the distances of points from a and b can also be 
made, by a suitable choice of a and b y to agree with those derived from 
the logarithm, we shall be able to identify distance with this logarithm. 
In this way — so it is contended — metrical Geometry may be wholly 


* The projective theory of distance and angle is due to Cayley (Sixth Memoir 
upon Quantic*, 1859) and to Klein (Moth. Annalen , Vols. iv, vi, vn, xxxvii). A fuller 
discussion than the following will be found in my Foundation* of Geometn/, Cambridge, 
1897, §§ 30-38. 



428 


407, 408] Prqjective Theory of Metrics 

brought under the projective sway; for a similar theory applies to 
angles between lines or planes. 

408. Let us consider first the case where our projective points are 
the ideal points of a descriptive space. Let x be considered fixed, and 
distinct from a and A. Let y be moved so that 77 becomes more and 
more nearly equal to 0. Then as r\ approaches /9, log (£*?) will be 
always finite, but will assume values exceeding any that may be assigned. 
This is mathematically expressed by saying that, if £ be any number 
other than a and £, then log (£8) is infinite. (If £ be equal to a or £, 
log (fa) and log ($8) are indeterminate; this case will therefore be 
supposed excluded in what follows.) Hence a and A must be at an 
infinite distance from every point except each other ; and their distance 
from each other is indeterminate. Again ,v and y must not be separated 
by a and A, i.e. y must belong to the segment ajub y if we wish the distance 
to be real ; for if £ - a and £ — 0 have the same sign, 17 — a and 17 — 0 
must also have the same sign, but if f — a and £ — 0 have different 
signs, 17 — a and 77 - 0 must also have different signs ; and these con- 
ditions amount to the same as the condition that y must belong to 
the segment curb. Hence if we insist that any two real points (i.e. points 
which are not merely ideal) are to have a real distance (i.e. a distance 
measured by a number which is not complex or purely imaginary), 
we shall require a and A to fulfil the following conditions : (1) they must 
be ideal points to which no real ones correspond ; (2) they must be the 
two limits of the series of those ideal points to which real points do 
correspond. These two conditions include all that has been said. For, 
in the first place, there is no real distance of any point from a or 0 ; 
hence a and 0 must not be coordinates of real points. In the second 
place, on one of the two segments defined by a and A, there is a real 
distance xy however near £ or 77 may approach to a or 0 ; hence a and A 
are the limits of the ideal points to which real ones correspond. In the 
third place, it follows from the last proposition that all ideal points 
to which real ones correspond belong to one of the two segments aA, 
and all ideal points to which no real ones correspond (except a and A 
themselves) belong to the other of the two segments ab. When these 
conditions are satisfied, the function log (£17) will have all the properties 
which are required for a measure of distance. 

The above theory is only applicable to descriptive space, for it is 
only there that we have a distinction between ideal and actual points. 
And in descriptive space we begin with an asymmetrical transitive 
relation by which order is generated on the straight line. Before 
developing a theoiy which is applicable to pure projective space, let 
us examine a little further the above theory, which may be called the 
descriptive theory of distance. 

In the first place, the ideal points to which real ones correspond, 
which for shortness I shall call proper points, form part of the whole 



424 


Space [char XLvra 

series of ideal points, which is closed. The proper points are a semi- 
continuous portion of this closed series, i.e. they have all the properties 
of a continuum except that of having two ends. It may happen that 
there is only one ideal point which is not proper, or it may happen 
that there are many. In the former case, the one purely ideal point 
will be the limit of the proper points in both directions. This is 
the case of Euclidean space, for in Euclidean space there is only one 
sheaf of lines to which a given line belongs and which has no vertex, 
namely the sheaf of lines parallel to the given line. Hence in / this 
case tlie points a and b must be taken to be identical. The function 
log (f 17) is then zero for all values of f and 77, and is therefore useless 
as a measure of distance. But by a familiar process of proceeding 
to the limit, we can, in this case, obtain the value £—7? for the 
distance*. This is the usual measure of elementary Geometry ; and for 
the distance of two points in a plane or in space we should similarly 
obtain the usual formula in this case. We see here the exact meaning 
of the common phrase that, in Euclidean space, -f x is the same as — x , 
or that the two ends of a line coincide. The fact is, of course, that the 
line has no ends, but that it determines only one ideal point which is 
not proper, and that this is the limit of proper ideal points in both 
directions : when it is added to the proper ideal points, we obtain a 
closed continuous series of sheaves to which the line in question belongs. 
In this way, a somewhat cryptic expression is found to have a very 
simple interpretation. 

But it may happen also— and this is the case of hyperbolic space — 
that there are many improper ideal points on a line. In this case, 
the proper ideal points will have two different limits ; these will be the 
sheaves of Lobatchewsky’s parallels in the two directions. In this case, 
our function log (£77) requires no modification, but expresses distance as 
it stands. The ideal points a and b are distinct, which is commonly 
expressed by saying that our line has two real and distinct points at 
infinity. 

Thus in descriptive space, in which our coordinates are obtained 
by correlation with those of the derived projective space, it is always 
possible to define a certain function of our projective coordinates which 
will fulfil the conditions required for a measure of distance. These 
conditions may be enumerated as follows* f. ( 1 ) Every pair of real 
points is to have a distance whose measure is real and finite, and vanishes 
only when the two points coincide. ( 2 ) If .r, ?y, ^ are collinear, and y 
lies between x and 3, the sum of the measures of ,ry and yz is to be the 
measure of ,rz. ( 3 ) As the ideal point corresponding to y approaches 

* See e.y. Klein, Vorlesungen alter nieht Kitk/idixche (leometne, Gottingen, 181)3, 
Vol. 1, pp. 151 If. 

t (:f. Whitehead, i Tniwrml Algebra , Bk. vi, Chap. 1. I confine myself in the 
text to distances on one straight line. 



425 


408 , 409 ] Projective Theory of Metrics 

the ideal point which is the limit of proper ideal points, while x 
remains fixed, the absolute value of the measure of xy is to grow without 
limit. 

It may well be asked, however, whv we should desire to define a 
function of two variable points possessing these properties. If the 
mathematician replies that his only object is amusement, his procedure 
will Ik* logically irreproachable, but extremely frivolous. He will, how- 
ever, scarcely make this reply. We have, as a matter of fact, the notion 
of a stretch, and, in virtue of tin* general axiom that every class has 
some magnitude of divisibility, we know that the stretch has magnitude. 
But we do not know, without a special assumption to that effect, that 
the stretch fulfils the axioms of Archimedes and of linearity. When 
once these are assumed, the above properties of the measure of distance 
become properties which must belong to the measure of stretch. But 
if these two axioms are not assumed, there is no reason why there 
should be any magnitude having a measure possessing the above four 
characteristics. Thus the descriptive theory of distance, unless we regard 
it as purely frivolous, does not dispense with the need of the above 
axioms. What it does sliow r — and this fact is extremely remarkable — 
is that, if stretches are numerically measurable, then they are measured 
by a constant multiple of the logarithm of the anharmonic ratio of the 
two ideal points associated with the ends of the stretch together with 
the tw o ideal points which limit the series of proper ideal points ; or, in 
case the latter pair are identical, the stretch is measured by a function 
obtained as the limit of the above when the said pair approach to 
identity and the constant factor increases without limit. This is a 
most curious result, but it does not obviate the need for the axioms 
which distinguish metrical Geometry. The same conclusion follows as 
regards metrical Geometry in a plane or in three dimensions ; but here 
new' complications are introduced, which are irrelevant to the present 
issue, and will therefore not be discussed. 

It is important to realize that the reference to two fixed ideal points, 
introduced by the descriptive theory of distance, has no analogue in the 
nature of distance or stretch itself. This reference is, in fact, a con- 
venient device, but nothing more. The stretch, in descriptive space, is 
completely defined by its end-points, and in no way requires a reference 
to two further ideal points. And as descriptive Geometry starts with 
the stretch, it w ould be a needless complication to endeavour subsequently 
to obtain a definition of stretch in terms of four points. In short, even 
if we had a projective theory of distance in descriptive space, this would 
still be not purely projective, since the whole projective space composed 
of ideal elements is derived from axioms which do not hold in projective 
space. 

409 . It remains to examine the projective theory of distance in 
projective space. The theory we have hitherto examined, since it used 



426 


Space [chap. xLvm 

the distinction of real and ideal elements, was descriptive, not projective; 
we have now to examine the corresponding theoiy for pure projective 
Geometry. Here there are no ideal elements of the above sort associated 
with our line ; if, therefore, cl and be real and distinct numbers, they 
will be the coordinates of real and distinct points. Hence there will be 
real points x, y which will be separated by a and ft, and will have an 
imaginary measure of distance. To this there could be no objection, 
but for the fact that we wish our measure to be the measure of a stretch. 
This is the reason why it is desired that any two real points should have 
a real measure of distance. In order to insure this result in ia pure 
projective space, it is necessary that a and should not be the co- 
ordinates of points at all, but should be conjugate complex numbers. 
It is further necessary that the constant multiple of the logarithm should 
be a pure imaginary. We then find that the distance of two real points 
always has a real measure, which is an inverse cosine*. In a projective 
space, the condition (2) of p. 424 introduces complications, since between 
has not, as in descriptive space, a simple meaning. The definition of 
between in this case is dealt with fully by Mr Whitehead in his Universal 
Algebra (§ 206). 

410. But if such a function is to be properly geometrical, and to 
give a truly projective theory of distance, it will be necessary to find 
some geometrical entity to which our conjugate complex numbers a 
and j3 correspond. This can be done by means of involutions. Although, 
in a projective space, there are no ideal points, yet there are what may 
be called ideal point-pairs. In Chapter xlv we considered involutions 
with real double points : if a, ft be two points on a line, all point-pairs 
x, x such that x , x are harmonic conjugates with respect to a, ft form 
an involution. In this case, x and x are said to be conjugate ; a and ft 
are each self-conjugate, and are called the double points of the invo- 
lution. But there are also involutions without real double points. The 
general definition of an involution may be given as follows (substituting 
the relation of x to x for the pair x, x') : An involution of points is 
a symmetrical one-one relation, other than identity, whose domain and 
converse domain are the same straight line, and which is such that any 
class of referents is projectively similar to the corresponding class of 
relata. Such a relation is either strictly an aliorelative, or is a self- 
relative as regards two and only two points, namely the double points 
of the involution. For every pair of distinct points on the line as 
double points there will be one and only one involution : all point- 
pairs (using this expression so as to exclude the identity of the two 
points of the pair) have a one-one correlation with some involutions. 
Thus involutions may be called ideal point-pairs : those that correspond 

* This is the form originally given by Cayley in the Sixth Memoir upon 
Quantics. The simpler logarithmic form is due to Klein. 



427 


409-411] Projective Theory of Metrics 

to an actual point-pair are called hyperbolic , the others elliptic . Thus 
an ideal point-pair is one and indivisible, being in fact a one-one 
relation. Two proper ideal point-pairs have an anharmonic ratio 
defined by their respective double points: two improper ideal point- 
pairs, or a proper and an improper ideal point -pair, have an analogous 
projective relation, which is measured by the function obtained as 
above from the supposition that a and /3 are conjugate complex 
numbers. This function may be called the anharmonic ratio of the 
two ideal point-pairs. If one be fixed and improper, the other variable 
and proper, an imaginary multiple of the logarithm of the resulting 
anharmonic ratio has the properties required for a measure of the 
distance of the actual point-pair corresponding to the proper ideal 
point-pair. This gives the pure projective theory of distance. But to 
this theory, as anything more than a technical development, there are 
the same objections as in the case of descriptive space ; i.e. unless there 
be some magnitude determined by every actual point-pair, there is no 
reason for the process by which we obtain the above measure of distance; 
and if there is such a magnitude, then the above process gives merely 
the measure, not the definition, of the magnitude in question. Thus 
stretch or distance remains a fundamental entity, of which the pro- 
perties are such that the above method gives a measure of it, but not a 
definition*. 

411. There is however another and a simpler way of introducing 
metrical notions into a projective space, and in this way distance 
becomes a natural accompaniment of the introduction of coordinates. 
Let p, q, r be three fixed points, abc a line not passing through p or q 
or r but in the plane j)qr. Let qr pass through a, rp through b, pq 
through c. Ijet A, be the relation which holds between x and y when 
these are points on aht', and xr, yq meet on ap ; and let 1 A a be 
similarly defined. Then a Mobius net may be regarded as constructed 
by repetitions of the relations A,, A a , R 9 . We shall have, if ^A, 2 , 
then xH ay z . We can define the square root of JB l , or any power of A, 
whose index is a positive or negative power of 2. Further, if h is any 
point of <yr, and xR x y means that x and y are on abc and xr, y.s meet 
on ap, then It, A,' = A/A, . From these propositions, which are proved 
by pure projective methods, it follows that if a and Q be numbers, we 
may define A, a+3 to mean A,* If/, provided f?, B and Rf have been already 
defined ; whence, since A, 3 * can be defined if n is a positive or negative 
integer, all rational powers of R x can be defined, and irrational powers 
can be defined as limits. Hence, if x be any real number, positive or 

negative, we can define Rf, for we may identify R{~* with A,*. We 
may now take this relation A,* as the distance of any two points between 

* Oil the above method of introducing imaginaries in projective Geometry, see 
von Staudt, Beitrtlge zur ftomwfne der Lage , i, § 7- 



428 


Space [chap. XLvm 

which it holds, and regard x as the measure of the distance. We shall 
find that distances so defined have the usual properties of Euclidean 
distances, except that the distance of a from any other point is infinite. 
Thus on a projective line any two points do actually have a relation 
which may be called distance, and in this sense a projective theory of 
metrical properties can be justified. But I do not know whether this 
method can be extended to a plane or to space. 

To sum up: Although the usual so-called projective theory of 
distance, both in descriptive and in projective space, is purely technical, 
yet such spaces do necessarily possess metrical properties, which can be 
defined and deduced without new indefinables or indemonstrables.\ But 
metrical Geometry, as an independent subject, requires the new' idea 
of the magnitude of divisibility of a series, which is indefinable, and does 
not belong, properly speaking, to pure mathematics. This idea is applied 
to stretches, angles, areas, dc., and it is assumed that all the magnitudes 
dealt with obey the axioms of Archimedes and linearity. Without these 
axioms, many of the usual metrical propositions cannot be proved in 
the usual metrical manner; with these axioms, the usual kind of 
elementary Geometry becomes possible, and such results as the unique- 
ness of the quadrilateral construction can be proved without three 
dimensions. Thus there is a genuinely distinct science of metrical 
Geometry, but, since it introduces a new indefinable, it does not belong 
to pure mathematics in the sense in which we have used the word in 
this work. It does not, as is often supposed, require distances and 
angles as new relations between points or lines or planes, but stretches 
and magnitudes of divisibility suffice throughout. On the other hand, 
projective and descriptive Geometry are both independent of all metrical 
assumptions, and allow the development of metrical properties out of 
themselves ; hence, since these subjects belong to pure mathematics, the 
pure mathematician should adopt their theory of metrical matters. 
There is, it is true, another metrical Geometry, which does work with 
distances, defined as one-one relations having certain properties, and this 
subject is part of pure mathematics ; but it is terribly complicated, and 
requires a bewildering number of axioms. Hence the deduction of 
metrical properties from the definition of a projective or descriptive 
spare has real importance, and, in spite of appearances to the contrary, 
it affords, from the point of view of pure mathematics, a genuine simpli- 
fication and unification of method. 



CHAPTER XLIX. 


DEFINITIONS OF VARIOUS SPACES. 

412. Ik the preceding discussions of different Geometries, I have 
usually, for the sake of convenience, adhered to the distinction between 
definitions and indefinables on the one hand, and axioms or postulates 
on the other. But this distinction, in pure mathematics, has no validity 
except as regards the ideas and propositions of Logic. In pure mathe- 
matics, all the propositions state logical implications containing a 
variable. This is, in fact, the definition, or part of the definition, of 
pure mathematics. The implications stated must flow wholly from the 
propositions of Ix>gic, which are prior to those of other branches of 
mathematics. l/)gic and the rest of pure mathematics are distinguished 
from applied mathematics by the fact that, in it, all the constants are 
definable in terms of some eight fundamental notions, which we agreed 
to call logical constants. What distinguishes other branches of mathe- 
matics from Logic is merely complication, which usually takes the form 
of a hypothesis that the variable belongs to some rather complicated 
class. Such a class will usually be denoted by a single symbol ; and the 
statement that the class in question is to be represented by such and 
such a symbol is what mathematicians call a definition. That is to say, 
a definition is no part of mathematics at all, and does not make any 
statement concerning the entities dealt with by mathematics, but is 
simply and solely a statement of a symbolic abbreviation : it is a pro- 
position concerning symbols, not concerning what is symbolized. I do 
not mean, of course, to affirm that the word definition has no other 
meaning, but only that this is its true mathematical meaning. All 
mathematics is built up by combinations of a certain number of primitive 
ideas, and all its propositions can, but for the length of the resulting 
formulae, be explicitly stated in terms of these primitive ideas ; hence 
all definitions are theoretically superfluous. But further, when Logic is 
extended, as it should be, so as to include the general theory of relations, 
there are, I believe, no primitive ideas in mathematics except such as 
belong to the domain of Logie. In the previous chapters of this Part, 
I have spoken, as most authors do, of certain indefinables in Geometry. 



430 


Sjmce [chap, xlix 

But this was a concession, and must now be rectified. In mathematics, 
two classes of entities which have internal relations of the &ame logical 
type are equivalent. Hence we are never dealing with one particular 
class of entities, but with a whole class of classes, namely, with all classes 
having internal relations of some specified type. And by the type of 
a relation I mean its purely logical properties, such as are denoted by 
the words one-one, transitive, symmetrical, and so on. Thus for example 
we defined the class of classes called progression by certain logical 
characteristics of the internal relations of terms of any class which is 
a progression, and we found that finite Arithmetic, in so far as it dfeals 
with numbers, and not with the terms or classes of which numbers ban 
be asserted, applies equally to all progressions. And when it is realised 
that all mathematical ideas, except those of Logic, can be defined,! it 
is seen also that there are no primitive propositions in mathematics 
except those of Logic. The so-called axioms of Geometry, for example, 
when Geometry is considered as a branch of pure mathematics, are 
merely the protasis in the hypothetical which constitute the science. 
They would be primitive propositions if, as in applied mathematics, 
they were themselves asserted; but so long as we only assert hypo- 
thetical ( i.e . propositions of the form “ A implies B") in which the 
supposed axioms appear as protasis, there is no reason to assert the 
protasis, nor, consequently, to admit genuine axioms. My object in 
the present chapter is to execute the purely formal task imposed by 
these considerations, and to set forth the strict definitions of various 
spaces, from which, without indetinables and without primitive pro- 
positions, the various Geometries will follow. I shall content myself 
with the definition of some of the more important spaces, since my object 
is chiefly to show that such definitions are possible. 

413. (1) Projective Space of three dimensions . A projective space of 

three dimensions is any class of entities such that there are at least two 
members of the class ; between any two distinct members there is one 
and only one symmetrical aliorelative, which is connected, and is tran- 
sitive so far as its being an aliorelative will permit, and has further 
pro|>erties to be enumerated shortly ; whatever such aliorelative may be 
taken, there is a term of the projective space not belonging to the 
field of the said aliorelative, which field is wholly contained in the 
projective space, and is called, for shortness, a straight line, and is 
denoted by oft, if o, b be any two of its terms; every straight line 
which contains two terms contains at least one other term ; if a, ft, c be 
any three terms of the projective space, such that c does not belong to 
the class oft, then there is at least one term of the projective space not 
belonging to any class a r, where x is any term of ah ; under the same 
circumstances, if a be a term of ftc, ft' a term of or, the classes aa\ 
6ft' have a common part; if d be any term, other tluin a and ft, 
of the class oft, and u, v any two terms such that d belongs to the 



431 


412 , 413 ] Definitions of Farious Spaces 

class uv 9 but neither u nor v belongs to the class oA, and if y be the 
only term of the common part of au and Ar, z the only term of the 
common part of av and. Au, x the only term of the common part of 
yz and oA, then x is not identical with d (under these circumstances 
it may be proved that the term x is independent of u and u, and is 
uniquely determined by a, A, d; hence x and d have a symmetrical 
one-one relation which may be denoted, for brevity, by x H^yd ; if y 9 e 
be two further terms of the projective space, belonging to the class xd 9 
and such that there are two terms g 9 h of the class xd for which we have 
gHxdh and gH y Ji 9 then we write for shortness yQxtf to express this 
relation of the four terms x 9 d, y 9 e ) ; a projective space is such that 
the relation whatever terms of the space x and d may be, is tran- 
sitive ; also that, if a, A, c*, d be any four distinct terms of one straight 
line, two and only two of the propositions aQi^l, aQ^b will hold ; 

from these properties of projective space it results that the terms of a 
line form a series ; this series is continuous in the sense defined in § 277 ; 
finally, if «, A, c 9 d, e be any five terms of a projective space, there will 
be in the class ae at least one term x 9 and in the class cd at least one 
term y 9 such that x belongs to the class by. 

This is a formal definition of a projective space of three dimensions. 
Whatever class of entities fulfils this definition is a projective space. 
I have enclosed in brackets a passage in which no new properties of 
projective space are introduced, which serves only the purpose of con- 
venience of language. There is a whole class of projective spaces, and 
this class has an infinite number of members. The existence-theorem 
may be proved to begin with, by constructing a projective space out of 
complex numbers in the purely arithmetical sense defined in § 360. 
We then know that the class of projective spaces has at least four 
members, since we know of four sub-classes contained under it, each 
of which has at least one member. In the first place, we have the 
above arithmetical space. In the second place, we have the projective 
space of descriptive Geometry, in which the terms of the projective 
space are sheaves of lines in the descriptive space. In the third 
place, we have the polar fonn of elliptic space, which is distinguished 
by the addition of certain metrical properties of stretches, consistent 
with, but not implied by, the definition of projective space; in the 
fourth place, we have the antipodal form of elliptic Geometry, in 
which the terms of the projective space are pairs of terms of the said 
elliptic space. And any number of varieties of projective space may be 
obtained by adding properties not inconsistent with the definition — for 
example, by insisting that all planes are to be red or blue. In fact, 
eveiy class of 2“* terms (i.e. of the number of terms in a continuous 
series) is a projective space ; for when two classes are similar, if one is 
the field of a certain relation, the other will be the field of a like relation. 
Hence by correlation with a projective space, any class of 2** terms 



432 


Space [chap, xlix 

becomes itself a projective space. The fact is, that the standpoint of 
line-Geometry is more fundamental where definition is concerned: a 
projective space would be best defined as a, class K of relations whose 
fields are straight lines satisfying the abpve conditions. This point is 
strictly analogous to the substitution of serial relations for series which 
we found desirable in Part IV. When a set of terms are to be regarded 
as the field of a class of relations, it is convenient to drop the terms and 
mention only the class of relations, since the latter involve the former, 
but not the former the latter. , 

It is important to observe that the definition of a space, as of knost 
other entities of a certain complexity, is arbitrary within certain limits. 
For if there be any property which implies and is implied by 011$ or 
more of the properties used in the definition, we may make a substitution 
of the new property in place of the one or more in question. For ex- 
ample, in place of defining the line by a relation between points, it is 
possible to define the line as a class having a certain relation to a couple 
of points. In such cases, we can only be guided by motives of simplicity. 

It seems scarcely necessary to give a formal definition of descriptive 
or metrical space, since the above model serves to show how such a 
definition might be constructed. I shall instead give a definition of 
Euclidean space. This I shall give in a form which is inappropriate 
when Euclidean space is considered as the limit of certain non-Euclidean 
spaces, but is very appropriate to quaternions and the vector Calculus. 
This form has been adopted by Peano*, and leads to a very simple 
account of the Euclidean axioms. I shall not strictly follow Peano, but 
my account will be very similar to his. 

414 . (2) Euclidean .space of three dimensions. A Euclidean space of 

three dimensions is a class of terms containing at least two members, and 
such that any two of them have one and only one asymmetrical one-one 
relation of a class, which will be called the class of vectors, defined by 
the following characteristics f : the converse of a vector, or the relative 
product of two vectors, is a vector; if a given vector holds between a and 6, 
v and d, then the vector which holds between a and c is the same as that 
which holds between h and d ; any term of the space has any assigned 
relation of the class to at least one term of the space ; if the nth power 
(where n is any integer) of any vector of the class is identity, then the 
vector itself is identity ; there is a vector whose nth power is a given 
vector ; any two vectors have one and only one symmetrical relation of 
a certain class having the following properties : the relation of any two 
vectors is measured by a real number, positive or negative, and is such 

* if Analisi della Teoria dei vettori,” Turin, 189ft (Aceadttmiu Jieale delle Scienxt t 
di Torino). 

t For the convenience of the reader, it may be well to observe that this relation 
corresponds to that of having a given distance in a given direction — direction being 
taken in the sense in which all parallel lines have the same direction. 



433 


413 , 414 ] Definitions of Various Spaces 

that the relation of a vector to itself is always measured by a positive 
number, and that the measure of the relation of the relative product of 
two vectors to a third vector is the sum of the measures of their several 
relations to the third vector; there is a vector satisfying the definition 
of an irrational power of a vector given Wow ; there are vectors which 
are not relative products of powers of two given vectors ; if j. A’ be 
three vectors, no one of which is a relative product of powers of one 
or both of the others, then all vectors are relative products of powers of 

h h At. 

The only points calling for explanation here are the notion of an 
irrational power of a vector and the measurable relation of two vectors. 
All rational powers are definite ; for every vector has an nth root, and 
the nth root has an rot.h power, which is the rn /nth power of the original 
vector But it does not follow that real powers which arc 1 not rational 
can be defined. The definition of limits of classes of vectors given by 
Peano* is, when translated into relational language, the following. IiCt 
u be a class of real numbers, x 0 a number belonging to the derivative 
of u. .Let some one-one relation subsist between all us and some or all 
vectors; and let v l)e the class of vectors correlative to u . Then the 
vector a is said to In* the limit of the class v as .r approaches .r 0 in 
the class w, when the limit of the measure of the relation to itself of the 
vector which, multiplied relatively into a , will give the correlate to ./• 
in the class v 9 is zero. The point of this definition is the use of the 
order obtained among vectors by means of the measurable relation which 
each has to itself. Thus suppose we have a progression *r,, ,r 2 , ... .r n , ... 
of rational numbers, and suppose these to be respectively the measures of 
the relations to themselves of the vectors a 19 ... « n , — Then if x be 

the limit of .r,, ... x n9 ... , there is to be a vector whose relation to 

itself is measured by x 9 and this is to be the limit of the vectors a,, a*,... 

« n , . . . ; and thus irrational powers of a vector become definable. The 
other point to be examined is the measurable relation between two 
vectors. This relation measures, in terms of elementary Geometry, the 
product of the two stretches represented by the vectors into the cosine 
of the angle between them : it is, in the language of the calculus of 
extension, the internal product of the two vectors. To say that the 
relation is measurable in terms of real numbers means, in the sense in 
which this statement is employed, that all such relations have a one-one 
relation to some or all of the real numbers ; hence, from the existence of 
irrational powers, it follows that all such relations form a continuous 
series ; to say that the relation of a vector to itself is always measured 
by a positive number means that there exists a section (in DedekindV 
sense) of the continuous series of relations, such that all those relations 
that vectors can have to themselves appear on one side of the section i 


* Op, cit. p. 22. 



434 Space [CHAP. XLIX 

while it can be proved that the relation which defines the section is that 
which the vector identity has to itself. 

r rhis definition is, of course, by no means the only one which can 
be given of Euclidean space, but it is, I think, the simplest. For this 
reason, and also because it belongs to an order of ideas which, being 
essentially Euclidean, is foreign to the methods of previous chapters, 

I have thought it worth while to insert it here. 

415. As another example which may serve to enlarge our ideas, 
I shall take the space invented by Clifford, or rather the space whiph is 
formally analogous to his surface of zero curvature and finite extent*. 

I shall first briefly explain the nature of this space, and then proceed 
to a formal definition. Spaces of the type in question may have any 
number of dimensions, but for the sake of simplicity I shall confine 
myself to two dimensions. In this space, most of the usual Euclidean 
properties hold as regards figures not exceeding a certain size ; that is 
to say, the sum of the angles of a triangle is two right angles, and there 
are motions, which may be called translations, in which all points travel 
along straight lines. But in other respects, the space* is very different 
from Euclidean space. To begin with, the straight line is a closed 
series, and the whole space has a finite area. In the second place, every 
motion is a translation ; a circular transformation (i.e. one which pre- 
serves distances from a certain fixed point unaltered) is never a motion, 
i.e. never leaves every distance unaltered ; but all translations can, as 
in Euclidean space, be compounded out of translations in two fixed 
directions. In this space, as in Euclid, we have parallels, i.e. straight 
lines which remain at a constant distance apart, and can be simul- 
taneously described in a motion ; also straight lines can be represented 
by linear equations. But the formula for distance is quite unlike the 
Euclidean formula. Thus if irk be the length of the whole straight line, 
and (iT, y\ (x\ y) be the coordinates of any two points (choosing a 
system in which the straight line has a linear equation), then if o> be 
the angle between the lines x = 0, y = 0, the distance of the two points 
in question is d, where 
d 

cos ^ = cos (x—x) cos (y —y') — cos to sin (,r - x) sin (y—y )* 

and the formula for the angle between two lines is similarly complicated. 
We may, in order to lead to these results, set up the following definition. 

(3) Clifford's space off two dimensions. A Clifford's space of two 
dimensions is a class of at least two terms, between any two of which 
there are two relations of different classes, called respectively distance 

* On the general subject of the spaces of which this the simplest example, see 
Klein, Math. Annalen xxxvii, pp. 554-o(U>, and Killing, Grundlugen der Geometric, 
Vol. i, Chap. iv. 



435 


414, 415] Definitions of Furious Spaces 

and direction, and possessing the following properties : a direction is a 
symmetrical aliorelative, transitive so far as its being an aliorelative will 
permit, but not connected ; a term of the space together with all the 
terms to which the said term has a given relation of direction form what 
is called a straight line ; no straight line contains all the terms of the 
space ; every term of the space has any assigned relation of direction to 
some but not all other terms of the space ; no pair of terms has more 
than one relation of direction ; distances are a class of symmetrical 
relations forming a continuous series, having two ends, one of which 
is identity; all distances except identity are intransitive aliorelatives ; 
every term of the space has any assigned relation of distance to some 
but not all of the terms of the space ; any given term of the space has 
any given distance and direction from tuo and only two other terms 
of the space, unless the given distance be either end of the series of 
distances ; in this case, if the given distance be identity, there is no term 
having this distance and also the given direction from the given term, 
but if the distance be the other end of the series, thtTe is one and only 
one term having the given distance and the given direction from the 
given term; distances in one straight line have the properties, mentioned 
in Chapter xlvii, required for generating an order among the terms of one 
straight line ; the only motions, i,e. one-one relations whose domain and 
converse domain are each the space in question and which leave all 
distances among the relata the same as those among the corresponding 
referents, are such as consist in combining a given distance, a given 
direction, and one of the two senses of the series constituting a straight 
line ; and every such combination is equivalent to the relative product 
of some distance in one fixed direction with some distance in another 
fixed direction, both taken with a suitable sense; finally all possible 
directions form a single closed continuous series in virtue of mutual 
relations. 

This completes, I think, the definition of a Clifford’s space of two 
dimensions. It is to be observed that, in this space, distance cannot be 
identified with stretch, because (1) we have only two dimensions, so that 
we cannot generate a closed series of terms on a line by means of pro- 
jective methods*, (2) the line is to be closed, so that we cannot generate 
order on the straight line by the descriptive method. It is for similar 
reasons that both directions and distances have to be taken as sym- 
metrical relations ; thus it is only after an order has been generated on 
a line that .we can distinguish two senses, which may be associated with 
direction to render it asymmetrical, and with distances in a given 
direction to give them signs. It is important to observe that, when 

* Mr W. E. Johnson has pointed out to me that this difficulty might be over- 
come by introducing the uniqueness of the quadrilateral construction by a special 
axiom— a method which would perhaps be simpler than the above. 



436 


Space [chap, xlix 

distance is taken as independent of the straight line, it becomes necessary, 
in order to distinguish different spaces, to assign some property or pro- 
perties of the one-one relations or transformations which leave distances 
unchanged. This method has been adopted by Lie in applying to 
Geometry the theory of continuous groups*, and has produced, in his 
hands and those of Klein, results of the greatest interest to non- 
Euclidean Geometry. But since, in most spaces, it is unnecessary to 
take distance as indefinable, I have been able, except in this instance 
of Clifford’s spacef, to adopt a simpler method of specifying spaces. 
For this reason, it was important to consider briefly some such [space 
as Clifford’s, in order to give an instance of the use of distance, affd of 
what geometers call motion, in the definition of a space. 

Enough has now been said, I hope, to show that the definition of a 
kind of space is always possible in purely logical terms, and that hew 
indefinables are not required. Not only are the actual terms composing 
a space irrelevant, and only their relations important, but even tbe 
relations do not require individual determination, but only specification 
as members of certain logical classes of relations. These logical classes 
are the elements used in geometrical definitions, and these are definable 
in terms of the small collection of indefinables out of which the logical 
calculus (including that of relations) is built up. This result, which 
holds throughout pure mathematics, was the principal object of the 
present chapter. 

* Leipziger Ikrichte, 18!)0. 

t If I had defined an elliptic space of two dimensions, 1 should have had to take 
distance as distinct from stretch, because the projective generation of order fails in 
two dimensions. 



CHAPTER L. 


THE CONTINUITY OF SPACE. 


416. It has been commonly supposed by philosophers that the 
continuity of space was something incapable of further analysis, to be 
regarded as a mystery, not critically inspected by the profane intellect. 
In Part V, I asserted that Cantor’s continuity is all that we require in 
dealing with space. In the present chapter, I wish to make good this 
assertion, in so far as is possible without raising the question of absolute 
and relative position, which I reserve for the next chapter. 

Let us begin with the continuity of projective space. We have seen 
that the points of descriptive space are ordinally similar to those of a 
semi-continuous portion of a projective space, namely to the ideal points 
which have real correlatives. Hence the continuity of descriptive space 
is of the same kind as that of projective space, and need not, there- 
fore, 1m; separately considered. Hut metrical space will require a new 
discussion. 

It is to lx* observed that Geometries, as they are treated now-a-days, 
do not begin by assuming spaces with an infinite numf)er of points ; in 
fact, space is, as Peano remarks*, a word with which Geometry can very 
easily dispense. Geometries begin by assuming a class-concept point, 
together with certain axioms from which conclusions can be drawn as 
to the number of points. So, in projective Geometry, we begin with the 
assumption that there are at least two points, and that any two points 
determine a class of points, the straight line, to which they and at 
least one other |>oint belong. Hence we have three points. We now 
introduce the new assumption that there is at least one point not on 
any given straight line. This gives us a fourth point, and since there 
must be points on the lines joining it to our previous points, we obtain 
three more points— seven in all. Hence we can obtain an infinite denu- 
merable series of points and lines, but we cannot, without a further 
assumption, prove that there are more than three points on any one 
line. Four points on a line result from the assumption that, if b and d 


* Kir. di Mat. Vnl iv, p. .V2. • 



438 


Space [chap, l 

be harmonic with respect to a and c, then b and d are distinct. But in 
order to obtain an infinite number of points on a line, we need the 
further assumptions from which the projective order results*. These 
assumptions necessitate a denumerable series of points on our line. 
With these, if we chose, we might be content. Such a series of 
points is obtained by successive quadrilateral constructions ; and if we 
chose to define a space in which all points on a line could be obtained 
by successive quadrilateral constructions starting with any three points 
of the line, no contradiction would emerge. Such a space would ha^e 
the ordinal type of the positive rationals and zero: the points on, a 
line would form a compact denumerable series with one end. The 
extension, introduced by assuming that the series of points is con- 
tinuous, is only necessary if our projective space is to possess the usual 
metrical properties — if, that is to say, there is to be a stretch, with 
one end and its straight line given, which is to be equal to any given 
stretch. With only rational points, this property (which is Euclid's 
postulate of the existence of the circle) cannot hold universally. But 
for pure projective purposes, it is irrelevant whether our space possesses 
or does not possess this property. The axiom of continuity itself may 
be stated in either of the two following forms. (1) All points on a 
line are limits of series of rational points, and all infinite series of 
rational points have limits ; (2) if all points of a line be divided into 
two classes, of which one wholly precedes the other, then either the first 
class has a last term, or the last has a first term, but both do not 
happen. In the first of these ways, the continuity which results is exactly 
Cantor's, but the second, which is Dedekind's definition, is a necessary, 
not a sufficient, condition for Cantor's continuity. Adopting this first 
definition, the rational points, omitting their first term, form an endless 
compact denumerable series ; all points ' form a perfect series ; and 
between any two points there is a rational point, which is precisely 
the ordinal definition of continuity f. Thus if a projective space is 
to have continuity at all, it must have the kind of continuity which 
belongs to the real numbers. 

417. Let us consider next the continuity of a metrical space ; and, 
for the sake of definiteness, let us take Euclidean space. The question 
is here more difficult, for continuity is not usually introduced by an 
axiom ad hoi\ but appears to result, in some sense, from the axioms of 
distance. It was already known to Plato that not all lengths are 
commensurable, and a strict proof of this fact is contained in the tenth 
book of Euclid. But this does not take us very far in the direction 
of Cantor's continuity. The gist of the assertion that not all lengths 
are commensurable, together with the postulate of the circle, may be 
expressed as follows. If AB,AC be two lengths along the same straight 


* Of. Fieri, op . cit. § (5, Prop. 1. 


t See Part V, Chap, xxxvi. 



439 


416, 417] The Continuity of Space 

line, it may happen that, if AB be divided into m equal parts, and AC 
into n equal parts, then, however m and n may be chosen, one of the 
parts of AB will not be equal to one of the parts of AC , but will be 
greater for some values of m and «, and less for others; also lengths 
equal to either may be taken along any given line and with any given 
end-points*. But this fact by no means proves that the points on 
a line are not denumerable, since all algebraic numbers are denumerable. 
Let us see, then, what our axioms allow us to infer. 

In Greek Geometry there were two great sources of irrationals, 
namely, the diagonal of a square and the circumference of a circle. But 
there could be no knowledge that these are irrationals of different kinds, 
the one being measured by an algebraic number, the other by a tran- 
scendent number. No general method was known for constructing 
any assigned algebraic number I, still less for constructing an assigned 
transcendent number. And so far as I know, such methods, except 
by means of limits, are still wanting. Some algebraic and some tran- 
scendent numbers can be constructed geometrically without the use of 
limits, but the constructions are isolated, and do not follow any general 
plan. Hence, for the present, it cannot be inferred from Euclid’s axioms 
that space has continuity in Cantor's sense, or that the points of space 
are not denumerable. Since the introduction of analytic Geometry, 
some equivalent assumption has been always tacitly made. For example, 
it has been assumed that any equation which is satisfied by real values 
of the variables will represent a figure in space ; and it seems even to be 
universally supposed that to every set of real Cartesian coordinates a 
point must correspond. These assumptions were made, until quite recent 
times, without any discussion at all, and apparently without any con- 
sciousness that they were assumptions. 

When once these assumptions are recognized as such, it becomes 
apparent that, here as in projective space, continuity must be introduced 
by an axiom ad hoc . But as against the philosophers, we may make the 
following remark. Cantor’s continuity is indubitably sufficient to satisfy 
all metrical axioms, and the only question is, whether existent space 
need have continuity of so high an order. In any case, if measurement 
is to be theoretically possible, space must not have a greater continuity 
than that of the real numbers. 

The axiom that the points on a line form a continuous series may be 
put in the form which results from amending Dedekind, or in the form 
that a line is a perfect series. In the first form, every section of the 
line is definable by a single point, which is at one end of one of the parts 
produced by the section, while the other part has no end. In the second 

* A length is not synonymous with a segment, since a length is regarded as 
essentially terminated. But a length is, for present purposes, synonymous with 
a stretch or a distance. 

+ For shortness, 1 shall identify numbers with the lengths which they measure. 



440 


Space [chap, l 

form, which is preferable because, unlike the first, it completely defines 
the ordinal type, every infinite series of points has a limit, and every point 
is a limiting point. It is not necessary to add that the line has cohesion** 
for this results from the axioms of Archimedes and of linearity, which 
are in any case essential to measurement. Whether the axiom of con- 
tinuity be true as regards our actual space, is a question which I see no 
means of deciding. For any such question must be empirical, and it 
would be quite impossible to distinguish empirically what may be called 
a rational space from a continuous space. But in any case thetfe is 
no reason to think that space has a higher power than that of \ the 
continuum. \ 

418. The axiom of continuity enables us to dispense with the 
postulate of the circle, and to substitute for it the following pair. 
(1) On any straight line there is a point whose distance from a given 
point on the line is less than a given distance. (2) On any straight 
line there is a point whose distance from a given point on or off* the line 
is greater than a given distance. From these two assumptions, together 
with continuity, the existence of the circle can be proved. Since it is 
not possible, conversely, to deduce continuity from the circle, and since 
much of analytic Geometry might be false in a discontinuous space, it 
seems a distinct advance to banish the circle from our initial assumptions, 
and substitute continuity with the above pair of axioms. 

419. There is thus no mystery in the continuity of space, and no 
need of any notions not definable in Arithmetic. There is, however, 
among most philosophers, a notion that, in space, the whole is prior to 
the parts f; that although every length, area, or volume can be divided 
into lengths, areas, or volumes, yet there are no indivisibles of which 
such entities are composed. According to this view, points are mere 
fictions, and only volumes are genuine entities. Volumes are not to be 
regarded as classes of points, but as wholes containing parts which are 
never simple. Some such view as this is, indeed, often put forward 
as giving the very essence of what should be called continuity. This 
question is distinct from the question of absolute and relative position, 
which I shall discuss in the following chapter. For, if we regard 
position as relative, our present question will arise again concerning 
continuous portions of matter. This present question is, in fact, 
essentially concerned with continuity, and may therefore be appro- 
priately discussed here. 

The series which arise in Arithmetic, whether continuous or not, 
are essentially composed of terms — integers, rationals, real numbers, etc. 
And where we come near to the continuity of space, as in the case of 
the real numbers, each real number is a segment or infinite class 

* See Part V, Chap. xxxv. 

t Cf. Leibniz, Phil. Werke (Gerhardt), ii, p. 379 ; iv, p. 491 ; also my Philosophy 
qf‘ Leibniz, Chap. ix. 



441 


417-421] The Continuity of* Space 

of rationals, and rto denial that a segment is composed of elements 
is possible. In tjiis case, we start from the elements and gradually 
construct various infinite wholes. But in the case of space, we ait; 
told, it is infinite wholes that ait; given to begin with ; the elements 
are only inferred, and the inference, we are assured, is very rash. This 
question is in the main one of Logic. Let us see how the above view 
is supported. 

Those who deny indivisible points as constituents of space have had, 
in the past, two lines of argument by which to maintain their denial. 
They had the difficulties of continuity and infinity, and they had the 
way in which space is presented in what, according to their school, they 
called intuition or sensation or perception. The difficulties of continuity 
and infinity, as we saw in Part V, are* a thing of the past ; hence this 
line of argument is no longer open to those who deny points. As 
regards the other argument, it is extremely difficult to give it a precise 
form — indeed I suspect that it is impossible. We may take it as agreed 
that everything spatial, of whose existence we become immediately aware 
in sensation or intuition, is complex and divisible. Thus the empirical 
premiss, in the investigation of space, is the existence of divisible entities 
with certain properties. But here it may be w r ell to make a little 
digression into the meaning of an empirical premiss. 

420. An empirical premiss is a proposition which, for some reason or 
for no reason, I believe, and which, we may add, is existential. Having 
agreed to accept this proposition, we shall usually find, on examination, 
that it is complex, and that there are one or more sets of simpler 
propositions from which it may be deduced. If P be the empirical 
premiss, let A be the class of sets of propositions (in their simplest form) 
from which P may lx* deduced ; and let two members of the class A be 
considered equivalent when they imply one another. From the truth 
of P we infer the truth of one set of the class A. If A has only one 
member, that member must be true. But if there are many members 
of the class A, not all equivalent, we endeavour to find some other 
empirical premiss P 7 , implied by all sets of simple propositions of the 
class A'. If now it should happen that the classes A and A' have only 
one common member, and the other members of A are inconsistent with 
the other members of A\ the common member must be true. If not, we 
seek a new empirical premiss P", and so on. This is the essence of 
induction*. The empirical premiss is not in any essential sense a 
premiss, but is a proposition which we wish our deduction to an-ive at. 
In choosing the premisses of our deduction, we are only guided by 
logical simplicity and the deducibility of our empirical premiss. 

421. Applying these remarks to Geometry, w'e see that the common 
desire for self-evident axioms is entirely mistaken. This desire is due to 

* (_’f. ( outurat, Ut ' Logiqnt de Ijttibmx, l*aris, |>. 



442 


Space [chap, l 

the belief that the Geometry of our actual space is an « priori science, 
based on intuition. If this were the case, it would be properly deducible 
from self-evident axioms, as Kant believed. But if we place it along 
with other sciences concerning what exists, as an empirical study based 
upon observation, we see that all that can be legitimately demanded is 
that observed facts should follow from our premisses, and, if possible, 
from no set of premisses not equivalent to those which we assume. No 
one objects to the law of gravitation as being not self-evident, and 
similarly, when Geometry is taken as empirical, no one can legitimately 
object to the axiom of parallels — except, of course, on the ground! that, 
like the law of gravitation, it need only be approximately true in prder 
to yield observed facts. It cannot be maintained that no premisses 
except those of Euclidean Geometry will yield observed results; but 
others which are permissible must closely approximate to the Euclidean 
premisses. And so it is with continuity : we cannot prove that our 
actual space must be continuous, but we cannot prove that it is not so, 
and we can prove that a continuous space would not differ in any dis- 
coverable manner from that in which wx live. 

422 . To return from this digression : we agreed that the empirical 
premisses, as regards the continuity of space, are concerned always with 
divisible entities which have divisible parts. The question before us is 
whether we are to infer from this that the logical premisses for the 
science of existing space ( i.e . the definition of existing space) may or 
must be concerned with divisible entities. The question whether our 
premisses must be concerned with divisible entities is fully answered, in 
the negative, by actual Geometry, where, by means of indivisible points, 
a space empirically indistinguishable from that in which we live is con- 
structed. The only reasons hitherto alleged by philosophers against 
regarding this answer as satisfactory, are either such as were derived 
from the difficulties of infinity and continuity, or such as were based 
upon a certain logical theory of relations. The former have been already 
disproved; the latter will be discussed in the next chapter. The question 
whether our premisses may be concerned with divisible entities is far more 
difficult, and can be answered only by means of the logical discussions 
of Part II. Whatever is complex, we then decided (§ 143), must be 
composed of simple elements ; and this conclusion carries us a long way 
towards the decision of our present question. But it does not quite 
end our doubts. We distinguished, in Part II, two kinds of wholes, 
namely aggregates and unities. The former may be identified, at any 
rate for present purposes, with classes, while the latter seem to be in- 
distinguishable from propositions. Aggregates consist of units from 
whose addition (in the sense presupposed in Arithmetic) they result; 
unities, on the contrary, are not reconstituted by the addition of their 
constituents. In all unities, one term at least is either a predicated 
predicate or a relating relation ; in aggregates, there is no such term. 



443 


421, 422] The Continuity of Space 

Now what is really maintained by those who deny that space is com- 
posed of points is, I imagine, the view that space is a unity, whose 
constituents do not reconstitute it. I do not mean to say that this 
view is consciously held by all who make the denial in question, but 
that it seems the only view which renders the said denial reasonable. 

Before discussing this opinion, it is necessary to make a distinction. 
An aggregate may be an aggregate of unities, and need by no means be 
an aggregate of simple terms. The question whether a space is an 
aggregate of unities or of simple terms is mathematically, though not 
philosophically, irrelevant ; the difference of the two cases is illustrated 
by the difference between an independent projective space and the pro- 
jective space defined in terms of the. elements of a descriptive space. 
For the present, I do not wish to discuss whether points are unities or 
simple terms, but whether space is or is not an aggregate of points. 

This question is one in which confusions are very liable to occur, 
and have, I think, actually occurred among those who have denied that 
a space is an aggregate. Relations are, of course, quite essential to a 
space, and this has led to the belief that a space m, not only its terms, 
but also the relations relating them. Here, however, it is easy to see 
that, if a space be the field of a certain class of relations, then a space 
is an aggregate; and if relations are essential to the definition of a 
space, there must be some class of relations having a field which is 
the space. The relations essential to Geometry will not hold between 
two spatially divisible terms : there is no straight line joining two 
volumes, and no distance between two surfaces. Thus, if a space is 
to be defined by means of a class of relations, it does not follow, as 
is suggested, that a space is a unity, but rather, on the contrary, that 
it is an aggregate, namely the field of the said class of relations. And 
against any view which starts from volumes or surfaces, or indeed any- 
thing except points and straight lines, we may urge, with Peano*, that 
the distinction between curves, surfaces, and volumes, is only to be 
effected by means of the straight line, and requires, even then, the most 
elaborate developments +. There is, therefore, no possibility of any 
definite Geometry without points, no logical reason against points, and 
strong logical reasons in their favour. We may therefore take it a s 
proved that, if we are to construct any self-consistent theory of space, 
we must hold space to be an aggregate of points, and not a unity which 
is indefinable as a class. Space is, in fact, essentially a class, since 
it cannot be defined by enumeration of its terms, but only by means 
of its relation to the class-concept point . Space is nothing but the 

* Riv . di Mat iv, p. 53. 

+ Cf. Peano, “Sur tine courbe qui remplit toute une aire plane/* Math. 
Annalen , xxxvi, where it is shown that a continuous curve can be made to pass 
through all the points of the area of a square, or, for that matter, of the volume 
of a cube. 



444 


Space [chap, l 

extension of the concept pointy as the British army is the extension 
of the concept British soldier ; only, since the number of points is in- 
finite, Geometry is unable to imitate the Army-List by the issue of a 
Space-List. 

Space, then, is composed of points ; and if analytical Geometry is to 
be possible, the number of points must be either equal to, or less than, 
the number of the continuum. If the number be less, some propositions 
of the accepted Geometry will be false ; but a space in which the number 
of points is equal to the numbei of finite numbers, and in whicji the 
points of a line form a series ordinally similar to the rationals, , will, 
with suitable axioms, be empirically indistinguishable from a continuous 
space, and may be actual. Thus Arithmetic, as enlarged by Cantdr, is 
undoubtedly adequate to deal with Geometry ; the only question is, 
whether the more elaborate parts of its machinery are required. It is 
in number that we become certain of the continuum ; among actual 
existonts, so far as present evidence shows, continuity is possible, but 
cannot be rendered certain and indubitable. 



CHAPTER LI. 


LOGICAL AKGUMKNTS AGAINST POINTS. 


423. It has been an almost universal opinion among philosophers, 
ever since the time of Leibniz, that a space composed of points is logically 
impossible. It is maintained that the spatial relations with which we 
have been concerned do not hold between spatial points, which essentially 
and timelessly have the relations which they do have, but between 
material points, which are capable of motion, i.e. of a change in their 
spatial relations. This is called the theory of relative position, whereas 
the theory of spatial points is called the theory of absolute position. 
Those who advocate relative position usually also maintain that matter 
and spatial relations, on account of certain contradictions supposed to 
be found in them, are not real, but belong only to the world of appear- 
ance. This is, however, a further point, which need not be explicitly 
discussed in what follows. Apart from this point, the issue between 
the absolute and relative theories may be stated as follows : The absolute 
theory holds that there are true propositions in which spatial relations 
are asserted to hold timelessly between certain terms, which may be 
called spatial points ; the relational theory holds that every true pro- 
position asserting a spatial relation involves a time at which this relation 
holds between its terms, so that the simplest spatial propositions assert 
triangular relations of a time and two terms, which may be called 
material points. 

The question as to which of these two theories applies to the actual 
world is, like all questions concerning the actual world, in itself irre- 
levant to pure mathematics*. But the argument against absolute position 
usually takes the form of maintaining that a space composed of points is 
logically inadmissible, and hence issues are raised which a philosophy of 
mathematics must discuss. In what follows, I am concerned only with 
the question: Is a space composed of points self-contradictory ? It is 
true that, if this question Ik? answered in the negative, the sole ground 

* Some arguments on this point will be found in the earlier part of my fiaper, 
“Is position in Time and Space absolute or relative?” Mind, N.S., No. 39; the later 
portions of this paper are here reprinted. 



446 


Space [char li 

for denying that such a space exists in the actual world is removed ; but 
this is a further point, which, being irrelevant to our subject, will be 
left entirely to the sagacity of the reader. 

424. The arguments against the absolute theory are, in my opinion, 
one and all fallacious. They are best collected in Lotze’s Metaphysic 
(§ 108 ft*.). They are there confused with arguments for the subjectivity 
of space — an entirely distinct question, as should have been evident 
from the fact that Kant, in the Critique , appears to have advocated the 
theory of absolute position*. Omitting arguments only bearing on (this 
latter point, we have the following summary of Lotze’s arguments against 
absolute space. 

(1) Relations only are either (a) as presentations in a relating 
consciousness, or (ft) as internal states in the real elements which are 
said to stand in these relations (§ 109). 

(2) The being of empty space is neither the being which works 
effects (which belongs to a thing), nor the mere validity of a truth, nor 
the fact of being presented by us. What kind of being is it then ? 

(§ 109). 

(8) All points are exactly alike, yet every pair have a relation 
peculiar to themselves ; but being exactly like every other pair, the 
relation should be the same for all pairs (§111). 

(4) The being of every point must consist in the fact that it 
distinguishes itself from every other, and takes up an invariable position 
relatively to every other. Hence the being of space consists in an active 
mutual conditioning of its various points, which is really an interaction 
(§ 110 ). 

(5) If the relations of points were a mere fact, they could be 
altered, at least in thought ; but this is impossible : we cannot move 
points or imagine holes in space. This impossibility is easily explained 
by a subjective theory (§ 110). 

(6) If there are real points, either (a) one point creates others in 
appropriate relations to itself, or (ft) it brings already existing points 
into appropriate relations, which are indifferent to their natures (§111). 

425. (1) All these arguments depend, at bottom, upon the first, the 
dogma concerning relations. As it is of the essence of the absolute theory 
to deny this dogma, I shall begin by examining it at some length f. 
“ All relations,” Lotze tells us, “ only are as presentations in a relating 
consciousness, or as internal states in the real elements which, as we are 
wont to say, stand in these relations.” This dogma Lotze regards as 
self-evident, as indeed he well may; for I doubt if there is one 
anterior philosopher, unless it be Plato, who does not, consciously or 

# Cf. Vailiinger, Commentary pp. 109-190. 

t The logical opinions which follow are in the main due to Mr G. E. Moore, to 
whom 1 owe also my first perception of the difficulties in the relational theory of 
space and time. 



447 


423-425] Logical arguments against Points 

unconsciously, employ the dogma as an essential part of his system. To 
deny it, therefore, is a somewhat hardy undertaking. I*t us, neverthe- 
less, examine the consequences to which the dogma leads us. 

It would seem that, if we accept the dogma, we must distinguish 
two kind of relations, (a) those which are presentations in a relating 
consciousness, and (/ 9 ) those which are internal states of the elements 
supposed to be related. These may be ultimately identical, but it will 
be safer in the mean time to treat them as different. Let us begin with 
those which are only presentations in a relating consciousness. These 
presentations, we must suppose, are beliefs in propositions asserting 
relations between the terms which appear related. For it must be 
allowed that there are beliefs in such propositions, and only such beliefs 
seem capable of being regarded as presentations in which relations have 
their being. But these beliefs, if the relations believed to hold have no 
being except in the beliefs themselves, are necessarily false. If I believe 
A to be ZT s father, when this is not the case, my belief is erroneous ; 
and if I believe A to be west of B , when westerliness in fact exists only 
in my mind, I am again mistaken. Thus this first class of relations has 
no validity whatever, and consists merely in a collection of mistaken 
beliefs. The objects concerning which the beliefs are entertained are as 
a matter of fact wholly unrelated ; indeed there cannot even be objects , 
for the plural implies diversity, and all beliefs in the relation of diversity 
must be erroneous. There cannot even be one object distinct from 
myself, since this would have to have the relation of diversity to me, 
which is impossible. Thus we are committed, so far as this class of 
relations goes, to a rigid monism. 

But now, what shall we say of the second class of relations, those 
namely which are reducible to internal states of the apparently related 
objects ? It must be observed that this class of relations presupposes a 
plurality of objects (two at least), and hence involves the relation of 
diversity. Now we have seen that, if there be diversity, it cannot be 
a relation of the first class ; hence it must itself be of the second class. 
That is, the mere fact that A is different from B must be reducible to 
internal states of A and B. But is it not evident that, before we can 
distinguish the internal states of A from those of /?, we must first dis- 
tinguish A from B ? i.e. A and B must be different, before they can have 
different states. If it be said that A and B are precisely similar, and 
are yet two, it follows even more evidently that their diversity is not 
due to difference of internal states, but is prior to it. Thus the mere 
admission that there are internal states of different things destroys the 
theory that the essence of relations is to be found in these states. We 
are thus brought back to the notion that the apparent relations of two 
things consist in the internal states of one thing, which leads us again 
to the rigid monism implied in the first type of relation. 

Thus the theory of relations propounded by Lotze is, in fact, a 



448 


Space [chap, li 

theory that there are no relations. This has been recognised by the 
most logical adherents of the dogma — e.g. Spinoza and Mr Bradley — 
who have asserted that there is only one thing, God or the Absolute, 
and only one type of proposition, namely that ascribing predicates to 
the Absolute. In order to meet this development of the above theory 
of relations, it will be necessary to examine the doctrine of subject and 
predicate. 

426 . Every proposition, true or false — so the present theory con- 
tends — ascribes a predicate to a subject, and — what is a corollary, from 
the above — there is only one subject. The consequences of this doctrine 
are so strange, that I. cannot believe they have been realised by those 
who maintain it. The theory is in fact self-contradictory. For if the 
Absolute has predicates, then there are predicates ; but the proposition 
44 there are predicates * is not one which the present theory can admit. 
We cannot escape by saying that the predicates merely qualify the 
Absolute; for the Absolute cannot be qualified by nothing, so that 
the proposition “there are predicates ” is logically prior to the pro- 
position 44 the Absolute has predicates.” Thus the theory itself demands, 
as its logical prtun , a proposition without a subject and a predicate ; 
moreover this proposition involves diversity, for even if there be only 
one predicate, this must be different from the one subject. Again, 
since there is a predicate, the predicate is an entity, and its predica- 
bility of the Absolute is a relation between it and the Absolute. Thus 
the very proposition which was to be non-relational turns out to be, 
after all, relational, and to express a relation which current philosophical 
language would describe as purely external. For both subject and 
predicate are simply what they are— neither is modified by its relation 
to the other. To be modified by the relation could only be to have 
some other predicate, and hence we should be led into an endless regress. 
In short, no relation ever modifies either of its terms. For if it holds 
between A and 2?, then it is between A and B that it holds, and to say 
that it modifies A and B is to say that it really holds between different 
terms C and 1). To say that two terms which are related would be 
different if they were not related, is to say something perfectly barren ; 
for if they were different, they would be other, and it would not be the 
terms in question, but a different pair, that would be unrelated. The 
notion that a term can be modified arises from neglect to observe the 
eternal self-identity of all terms and all logical concepts, which alone 
form the constituents of propositions*. What is called modification 
consists merely in having at one time, but not at another, some specific 
relation to some other specific term ; but the term which sometimes has 
and sometimes has not the relation in question must be unchanged, 

* See Mr G. E. Moore’s paper on “The Nature of Judgment,” Mind, N.S., 
V r ol. vin. Also j KUprttj §§ 47, 4*1, where the view adopted differs somewhat from 
Mr Moore’s. 



425 - 427 ] Logical arguments against Points 449 

otherwise it would not be that term which had ceased to have the 
relation. 

The general objection to Lotze’s theory of relations may be thus 
summed up. The theory implies that all propositions consist in the 
ascription of a predicate to a subject, and that this ascription is not 
a relation. The objection is, that the predicate is either something 
or nothing. If nothing, it cannot be predicated, and the pretended 
proposition collapses. If something, predication expresses a relation, 
and a relation of the very kind which the theory was designed to avoid. 
Thus in either case the theory stands condemned, and there is no reason 
for regarding relations as all reducible to the subject-predicate form. 

427. (2) I come now to the second of Lot/e's objections to empty 

space. This is again of a somewhat abstract logical character, but it 
is far easier to dispose of, since it depends upon a view more or less 
peculiar to Lotze. There are, it says, three and only three kinds of 
being, no one of which belongs to space. These are (a) the being 
of things, which consists in activity or the power to produce effects; 
(@) the validity of a truth ; (y) the being which belongs to the contents 
of our presentations. 

The answer to this is, that there is only one kind of being, namely, 
being dmpliciten , and only one kind of existence, namely, existence dm- 
pUciter. Both being and existence, I believe, belong to empty space; 
but being alone is relevant to the refutation of the relational theory — 
existence belongs to the question which I^itze confounds with the above, 
namely, as to the reality or subjectivity of space. It may be well first 
to explain the distinction of being and existence, and then to return to 
Lotze’s three kinds of being. 

Being is that which belongs to every conceivable term, to every 
possible object, of thought — in short to everything that can possibly 
occur in any proposition, true or false, and to all such propositions 
themselves. Being belongs to whatever can be counted. If A be any 
term that can be counted as one, it is plain that A is something, and 
therefore that A is. “ A is not*” must always be either false or meaning- 
less. For if A were nothing, it could not be said not to be; “A is not" 
implies that there is a term A whose being is denied, and hence that 
A is. Thus unless “ A is not " be an empty sound, it must be false — 
whatever A may be, it certainly is. Numbers, the Homeric gods, 
relations, chimeras and four-dimensional spaces all have being, for if 
they were not entities of a kind, we could make no propositions about 
them. Thus being is a general attribute of everything, and to mention 
anything is to show that it is. 

Existence, on the contrary, is the prerogative of some only amongst 
beings. To exist is to have a specific relation to existence — a relation, 
by the way, which existence itself does not have. This shows, inci- 
dentally, the weakness of the existential theory of judgment — the theory. 



460 


Space [chap, li 

that is, that every proposition is concerned with something that exists. 
For if this theory were true, it would still be true that existence itself 
is an entity, and it must be admitted that existence does not exist 
Thus the consideration of existence itself leads to non -existential pro- 
positions, and so contradicts the theory. The theory seems, in fact, to 
have arisen from neglect of the distinction between existence and being. 
Yet this distinction is essential, if we are ever to deny the existence of 
anything. For what does not exist must be something, or it would be 
meaningless to deny its existence; and hence we need the concept of 
being, as that which belongs even to the non-existent. 

Returning now to Lotze’s three kinds of being, it is sufficiently 
evident that his views involve hopeless confusions. 

(a) The being of things, Lotze thinks — following Leibniz here as 
elsewhere — consists in activity. Now activity is a highly complex notion, 
which Lotze falsely supposed unanalyzable. But at any rate it is plain 
that, if there be activity, what is active must both be and exist, in 
the senses explained above. It will also be conceded, I imagine, that 
existence is conceptually distinguishable from activity. Activity may 
be a universal mark of what exists, but can hardly be synonymous with 
existence. Hence Lotze requires the highly disputable proposition that 
whatever exists must be active. The true answer to this proposition 
lies (1) in disproving the grounds alleged in its favour, (2) in proving 
that activity implies the existence of time, which cannot be itself active. 
For the moment, however, it may suffice to point out that, since existence 
and activity are logically separable, the supposition that something which 
is not active exists cannot be logically absurd. 

(/9) The validity of a truth — which is Lotze’s second kind of being — 
is in reality no kind of being at all. The phrase, in the first place, is 
ill-chosen — what is meant is the truth of a truth, or rather the truth of 
a proposition. Now the truth of a proposition consists in a certain 
relation to truth, and presupposes the being of the proposition. And 
as regards being, false propositions are on exactly the same level, since 
to be false a proposition must already be. Thus validity is not a kind 
of being, but being belongs to valid and invalid propositions alike. 

(7) The being which belongs to the contents of our presentations is 
a subject upon which there exists everywhere the greatest confusion. 
This kind is described by Lotze as “ ein VorgesteUtwerden dutch urn? 
Lotze presumably holds that the mind is in some sense creative — that 
what it intuits acquires, in some sense, an existence which it would not 
have if it were not intuited. Some such theory is essential to every 
form of Kantianism — to the belief, that is, that propositions which are 
believed solely because the mind is so made that we cannot but believe 
them may yet be true in virtue of our belief. But the whole theory 
rests, if I am not mistaken, upon neglect of the fundamental distinction 
between an idea and its object. Misled by neglect of being, people 



451 


427 , 428 ] Logical arguments against Points 

have supposed that what does not exist is nothing. Seeing that numbers, 
relations, and many other objects of thought, do not exist outside the 
mind, they have supposed that the thoughts in which we think of these 
entities actually create their own objects. Every one except a philo- 
sopher can see the difference between a post and iny idea of a post, 
but few see the difference between the number 2 and my idea of the 
number 2. Yet the distinction is as necessary in one case as in the other. 
The argument that 2 is mental requires that 2 should be essentially an 
existent. But in that case it would be particular, and it would be 
impossible for 2 to be in two minds, or in one mind at two times. Thus 
2 must be in any case an entity, which will have being even if it is in no 
mind *. But further, there are reasons for denying that 2 is created by 
the thought which thinks it. For, in this case, there could never be two 
thoughts until some one thought so ; hence what the person so thinking 
supposed to be two thoughts would not have been two, and the opinion, 
when it did arise, would be erroneous. And applying the same doctrine 
to 1; there cannot Ik? one thought until some one thinks so. Hence 
Adam's first thought must have been concerned with the number 1 ; 
for not a single thought could precede this thought. In short, all 
knowledge must be recognition, on pain of being mere delusion ; Arith- 
metic must be discovered in just the same sense in which Columbus 
discovered the West Indies, and we no more create numbers than he 
created the Indians. The number 2 is not purely mental, but is an 
entity which may be thought of. Whatever can be thought of has 
being, and its being is a precondition, not a result, of its being thought 
of. As regards the existence of an object of thought, however, nothing 
can be inferred from the fact of its being thought of, since it certainly 
does not exist in the thought which thinks of it. Hence, finally, no 
special kind of being belongs to the objects of our presentations as such. 
With this conclusion, Lotze’s second argument is disposed of. 

428 . (3) Lotze’s third argument has been a great favourite, ever 

since Leibniz introduced it. All points, we are told, are exactly alike, 
and therefore any two must have the same mutual relation as any 
other two ; yet their mutual distances must differ, and even, according 
to Lotze (though in this, in the sense in which he seems to mean it, 
he is mistaken), the relation of every pair must be peculiar to that 
pair. This argument will be found to depend again upon the subject- 
predicate logic which we have already examined. To be exactly alike 
can only mean — as in Leibniz's Identity of Indiscemibles — not to 
have different predicates. But when once it is recognised that there 
is no essential distinction between subjects and predicates, it is seen that 
any two simple terms simply differ immediately — they are two, and 
this is the sum-total of their differences. Complex terms, it is true, 
have differences which can lx; revealed by analysis. The constituents 

# Cf. Frege, Grundgesetxe dcr Arithmetic t, p. xviii. 



452 Space [chap, li 

of the one may be A , if, C, 22, while those of the other are A , £, £, G. 
But the differences of 2?, C, D from £, F, G are still immediate dif- 
ferences, and immediate differences must be the source of all mediate 
differences. Indeed it is a sheer logical error to suppose that, if there 
were an ultimate distinction between subjects and predicates, subjects 
could be distinguished by differences of predicates. For before two 
subjects can differ as to predicates, they must already be two ; and 
tjius the immediate diversity is prior to that obtained from diversity 
of predicates. Again, two terms cannot be distinguished in the first 
instance by difference of relation to other terms; for difference of relation 
presupposes two distinct terms, and cannot therefore be the ground of 
their distinctness. Thus if there is to be any diversity at all, there must 
be immediate diversity, and this kind belongs to points. 

Again, points have also the subsequent kind of diversity consisting in 
difference of relation. They differ not only, as Lotze urges, in their 
relations to each other, but also in their relations to the objects in them. 
Thus they seem to be in the same position as colours, sounds, or smells. 
Two colours, or two simple smells, have no intrinsic difference save im- 
mediate diversity, but have, like points, different relations to other terms. 

Wherein, then, lies the plausibility of the notion that all points are 
exactly alike ? This notion is, I believe, a psychological illusion, due to 
the fact that we cannot remember a point, so as to know it when we 
meet it again. Among simultaneously presented points it is easy to 
distinguish ; but though we are perpetually moving, and thus being 
brought among new points, we are quite unable to detect this fact by 
our senses, and we recognise places only by the objects they contain. 
But this seems to be a mere blindness on our part — there is no difficulty, 
so far as I can see, in supposing an immediate difference between points, 
as between colours, but a difference which our senses are not constructed 
to be aware of. Let us take an analogy : Suppose a man with a very 
bad memory for faces: he would be able to know, at any moment, 
whether he saw one face or many, but he would not Ik? aware whether 
he had ever seen any of the faces before. Thus he might be led to 
define people by the rooms in which he saw them, and to suppose it 
self-contradictory that new people should come to his lectures, or old 
people cease to do so. In the latter point, at least, it will be admitted 
by lecturers that he would be mistaken. And as with faces, so with 
points — inability to recognise them must be attributed, not to the absence 
of individuality, but merely to our incapacity. 

429 . (4) Lotze’s fourth argument is an endeavour to effect a reductio 
ad abmrdum , by proving that, on the absolute theory, points must inter- 
act. The being of every point, Lotze contends, must consist in the 
fact that it distinguishes itself from every other, and takes up an 
invariable position relatively to every other. Many fallacies are con- 
tained in this argument. In the first place, there is what may be called 



453 


428, 429] Logical arguments against Points 

the ratiocinator’s fallacy, which consists in supposing that everything 
has to be explained by showing that it is something eLse. Thus the 
being of a point, for Lotze, must be found in its difference from other 
points, while, as a matter of fact, its being is simply its being. So far 
from being explained by something else, the being of a point is pre- 
supposed in all other propositions about it, as e.g. in the proposition 
that the point differs from other points. Again, the phrase that the 
point distinguishes itself from all other points seems to be designed to 
imply some kind of self-assertion, as though the point would not be 
different unless it chose to differ. This suggestion helps out the con- 
clusion, that the relations between points are in reality a form of 
interaction. Lotze, believing as he does that activity is essential to 
existence, is unable to imagine any other relation between existents 
than that of interaction. How hopelessly inapplicable such a view is, 
will appear from an analysis of interaction. Interaction is an enormously 
complex notion, presupposing a host of other relations, and involving, in 
its usual form, the distinction of a thing from its qualities — a distinction 
dependent on the subject-predicate logic already criticized. Interaction, 
to begin with, is either the simultaneous action of A on B and B on A , 
or the action of the present states of A and B conjointly on their states 
at the next instant. In either case it implies action. Action generally 
may be defined as a causal relation between one or more states of one or 
more things at the present instant and one or more states of the same or 
different things at a subsequent instant. When there is only one thing 
in both cases, the action is immanent if the thing be the same in cause 
and effect, transient if the cause be in one thing and the effect in 
another. In order to speak of action, rather than causality simply, it 
is necessary to suppose things enduring for a certain time, and having 
changing states. Thus the notion of interaction presupposes the fol- 
lowing relations: (1) diversity between things; (2) diversity between 
the states of things ; (3) simultaneity ; (4) succession ; (5) causality ; 
(6) the relation of a thing to its states. This notion, involving, as 
a moment’s inspection shows, six simpler relations in its analysis, is 
supposed to be the fundamental relation ! No wonder absurdities are 
produced by such a supposition. But the absurdities belong to Lotze, 
not to space. To reduce the relations of points to interactions, on the 
ground that interaction is the type of all relations, is to display a com- 
plete incapacity in the simplest problems of analysis. The relations of 
points are not interactions, any more than before and after, or diversity, 
or greater and less, are interactions. They are eternal relations of 
entities, like the relation of 1 to 2 or of interaction itself to causality. 
Points do not assign positions to each other, as though they were each 
other’s pew-openers : they eternally have the relations which they have, 
just like all other entities. The whole argument, indeed, rests upon an 
absurd dogma, supported by a false and scholastic logic. 



454 


Space [chap, li 

430. (5) The fifth argument seems to be designed to prove the 

Kantian apriority of space. There are, it says, necessary propositions 
concerning space, which show that the nature of space is not a “ mere 
fact/’ We are intended to infer that space is an a priori intuition, 
and a psychological reason is given why we cannot imagine holes in 
space. The impossibility of holes is apparently what is called a necessity, 
of thought. This argument again involves much purely logical dis- 
cussion. Concerning necessities of thought, the Kantian theory seems 
to lead to the curious result that whatever we cannot help believing > 
must be false. What we cannot help believing, in this case, is something » 
as to the nature of space, not as to the nature of our minds. The 
explanation offered is, that there is no space outside our minds ; whence 
it is to be inferred that our unavoidable beliefs about space are all 
mistaken. Moreover we only push one stage farther back the region 
of “mere fact,” for the constitution of our minds remains still a 
mere fact. 

The theory of necessity urged by Kant, and adopted here by Lotze, 
appears radically vicious. Everything is in a sense a mere fact. A 
proposition is said to be proved when it is deduced from premisses ; but 
the premisses, ultimately, and the rule of inference, have to be simply 
assumed. Thus any ultimate premiss is, in a certain sense, a mere fact. 
On the other hand, there seems to be no true proposition of which there 
is any sense in saying that it might have been false. One might as well 
say that redness might have been a taste and not a colour. What is 
true, is true ; what is false, is false ; and concerning fundamentals, there 
is nothing more to be said. The only logical meaning of necessity seems 
to be derived from implication. A proposition is more or less necessary 
according as the class of propositions for which it is a premiss is greater 
or smaller*. In this sense the propositions of logic have the greatest 
necessity, and those of geometry have a high degree of necessity. But 
this sense of necessity yields no valid argument from our inability to 
imagine holes in space to the conclusion that there cannot really be any 
space at all except in our imaginations. 

431. (6) The last argument may be shortly disposed of. If points 

be independent entities, Lotze argues — so I interpret him — that we can 
imagine a new point coming into existence. This point, then, must 
have the appropriate relations to other points. Either it creates the 
other points with the relations, or it merely creates the relations to 
already existing points. Now it must be allowed that, if there be real 
points, it is not self-contradictory to suppose some of them non-existent. 
But strictly speaking, no single proposition whatever is self-contradictory. 
The nearest approach would be “ No proposition is true,” since this 
implies its own truth. But even here, it is not strictly self-contradictory 


* Cf. G. E. Moore, “Necessity,” Mind, N.S., No. #5. 



455 


430 , 431 ] Logical arguments against Points 

to deny the implication. Everywhere we come upon propositions ac- 
cepted because they are self-evident, and for no other reason ; the law 
of contradiction itself is such a proposition. The mutual implication of 
all the points of space seems to be another; the denial of some only 
among points is rejected for the same reason as the assertion that such 
and such a proposition is both true and false, namely, because both are 
obviously untrue. But if, per impossibile , a point previously missing 
were to come into existence, it would not create new points, but would 
have the appropriate relations to already existing points. The point, 
in fact, would have already had being, and as an entity would have 
eternally had to other points the same relations as it has when it comes 
into existence. Thus Lotze’s argument on this, as on other points, 
depends upon a faulty logic, and is easily met by more correct views 
as to the nature of judgment. 

I conclude, from the above discussion, that absolute position is not 
logically inadmissible, and that a space composed of points is not self- 
contradictory. The difficulties which used to be found in the nature 
of infinity depended upon adherence to one definite axiom, namely, that 
a whole must have more terms than a part; those in the nature of 
space, on the other hand, seem to have been derived almost exclusively 
from general logic. With a subject-predicate theory of judgment, space 
necessarily appears to involve contradictions; but when once the ir- 
reducible nature of relational propositions is admitted, all the supposed 
difficulties vanish like smoke*. There is no reason, therefore, so far as 
I am able to perceive, to deny the ultimate and absolute philosophical 
validity of a theory of geometry which regards space as composed of 
points, and not as a mere assemblage of relations between non-spatial 
terms. 


* Cf. my Philosophy of Leibniz, Cambridge, 11100, Chap. x. 



CHAPTER III. 


KANT'S THEORY OF SPACE. 

432. In the present chapter I do not propose to undertake a 
minute or textual examination of Kant’s opinions ; this has been done 
elsewhere, and notably in Vaihinger’s monumental commentary, so well 
that it need not be done over again here. It is only the broad outlines 
of the Kantian doctrine that I wish to discuss. This doctrine, more or 
less modified, has held the field for over a century, and has won a nearly 
universal acceptance. As my views are, on almost every point of mathe- 
matical theory, diametrically opposed to those of Kant, it becomes 
necessary explicitly to defend the opinions in which I differ from him*. 
In this I shall pay special attention to what Kant calls the transcendental 
arguments, i.e. those derived from the nature of mathematics. 

433. Broadly speaking, the way in which Kant seeks to deduce his 
theory of space from mathematics (especially in the Prolegomena) is 
as follows. Starting from the question: “How is pure mathematics 
possible?” Kant first points out that all the propositions of mathe- 
matics are synthetic. He infers hence that these propositions cannot, 
as Leibniz had hoped, be proved by means of a logical calculus ; on the 
contrary, they require, he says, certain synthetic a priori propositions, 
which may be called axioms, and even then (it would seem) the reasoning 
employed in deductions from the axioms is different from that of pure 
logic. Now Kant was not willing to admit that knowledge of the 
external world could be obtained otherwise than by experience ; hence 
he concluded that the propositions of mathematics all deal with some- 
thing subjective, which he calls a form of intuition. Of these forms 
there are two, space and time ; time is the source of Arithmetic, space 
of Geometry. It is only in the forms of time and space that objects 
can be experienced bv a subject ; and thus pure mathematics must be 
applicable to all experience. What is essential, from the logical point 

* 'Hie theory of space which I shall discuss will be that of the Critique and the 
Prolegomena. Pre-critical works, and the Metaphysische Anfangxgriinde der Natur - 
wimruchaft (which differs from the Critique on this point), will not be considered. 



457 


432 - 434 ] Kants theory of space 

of view, is, that the a priori intuitions supply methods of reasoning and 
inference which formal logic does not admit ; and these methods, we are 
told, make the figure (which may of course be merely imagined) essential 
to all geometrical proofs. The opinion that time and space are sub- 
jective is reinforced by the antinomies, where Kant endeavours to prove 
that, if they be anything more than forms of experience, they must be 
definitely self-contradictory. 

In the above outline I have omitted everything not relevant to the 
philosophy of mathematics. The questions of chief importance to us, 
as regards the Kantian theory, are two, namely, (1) are the reasonings 
in mathematics in any way different from those of Formal Logic P (2) are 
there any contradictions in the notions of time and space ? If these two 
pillars of the Kantian edifice can be pullfkl down, we shall have success- 
fully played the part of Samson towards his disciples. 

434 . The question of the nature of mathematical reasoning was 
obscured in Kant’s day by several causes. In the first place, Kant never 
doubted for a moment that the propositions of logic are analytic, whereas 
he rightly perceived that those of mathematics are synthetic. It has 
since appeared that logic is just as synthetic as all other kinds of truth ; 
but this is a purely philosophical question, which I shall here pass by*. 
In the second place, formal logic was, in Kant’s day, in a very much 
more backward state than at present. It was still possible to hold, as 
Kant did, that no great advance had been made since Aristotle, and 
that none, therefore, was likely to occur in the future. The syllogism 
still remained the one type of formally correct reasoning; and the syl- 
logism was certainly inadequate for mathematics. But now, thanks 
mainly to the mathematical logicians, formal logic is enriched by several 
forms of reasoning not reducible to the syllogism f, and by means of 
these all mathematics can be, and large parts of mathematics actually 
have been, developed strictly according to the rules. In the third place, 
in Kant’s day, mathematics itself was, logically, very inferior to what it 
is now. It is perfectly true, for example, that any one who attempts, 
without the use of the figure, to deduce Euclid’s seventh proposition 
from Euclid’s axioms, will find the task impossible ; and there prolmbly 
did not exist, in the eighteenth century, any single logically correct 
piece of mathematical reasoning, that is to say, any reasoning which 
correctly deduced its result from the explicit premisses laid down by the 
author. Since the correctness of the result seemed indubitable, it was 
natural to suppose that mathematical proof was something different 
from logical proof. But the fact is, that the whole difference lay in 
the fact that mathematical proofs were simply unsound. On closer 
examination, it has been found that many of the propositions which, 

* See my Philosophy of Leibniz , $11. 

t See Chap, n nupra . esp. § 18. 



468 


Space [chap, lii 

to Kant, were undoubted truths, are as a matter of fact demonstrably 
false*. A still larger class of propositions — for instance, Euclid’s seventh 
proposition mentioned above — can be rigidly deduced from certain pre- 
misses, but it is quite doubtful whether the premisses themselves are 
true or false. Thus the supposed peculiarity of mathematical reasoning 
has disappeared. 

The belief that the reasonings of Geometry are in any way peculiar 
has been, I hope, sufficiently refuted already by the detailed accounts 
which have been given of these reasonings, and especially by Chapter xux. 
We have seen that all geometrical results follow, by the mere rules cif 
logic, from the definitions of the various spaces. And as regards thfc 
opinion that Arithmetic depends upon time, this too, I hope, has been 
answered by our accounts of the relation of Arithmetic to Logic. In- 
deed, apart from any detail, it seems to be refuted by the simple 
observation that time must have parts, and therefore plurality, whole 
and part, are prior to any theory of time. All mathematics, we may 
say — and in proof of our assertion we have the actual development of 
the subject — is deductible from the primitive propositions of formal logic: 
these being admitted, no further assumptions are required. 

But admitting the reasonings of Geometry to be purely formal, a 
Kantian may still maintain that an a priori intuition assures him that 
the definition of three-dimensional Euclidean space, alone among the 
definitions of possible spaces, is the definition of an existent, or at any 
rate of an entity having some relation to existents which other spaces 
do not have. This opinion is, strictly speaking, irrelevant to the philo- 
sophy of mathematics, since mathematics is throughout indifferent to 
the question whether its entities exist. Kant thought that the actual 
reasoning of mathematics was different from that of logic ; the suggested 
emendation drops this opinion, and maintains merely a new primitive 
proposition, to the effect that Euclidean space is that of the actual 
world. Thus, although I do not believe in any immediate intuition 
guaranteeing any such primitive proposition, I shall not undertake the 
refutation of this opinion. It is enough, for my purpose, to have shown 
that no such intuition is relevant in any strictly mathematical pro- 
position. 

436. It remains to discuss the mathematical antinomies. These 
are concerned with infinity and continuity, which Kant supposed to be 
specially spatio-temporal. AVe have already seen that this view is mis- 
taken, since both occur in pure Arithmetic. We have seen also in 
Part V (especially in Chapter xui) that the supposed antinomies of 
infinity and continuity, in their arithmetical form, are soluble ; it 
remains to prove the same conclusion concerning Kant’s spatio-temporal 

* For example, the proposition that every continuous function can be dif- 
ferentiated. 



434 , 435 ] Kant's theory of space 459 

form. The third and fourth antinomies are not relevant here, since they 
involve causality ; only the first two, therefore, will be examined. 

First Antinomy . Thesis : u The world has a beginning in time, and 
as regards space also is enclosed within limits.’’ This statement is not 
concerned with pure time and pure space, but with the things in them. 
The proof, such as it is, applies in the first instance to time only, and is 
effected by rednctio ad absurdum . “ For assume,” it says, “ that the 

world has no beginning in time, then an eternity has passed away 
( abgelaufen ) before every given point of time, and consequently an 
infinite series of conditions of the things in the world has happened. 
But the infinity of a series consists in this, that it can never be com- 
pleted by successive synthesis. Consequently an infinite past series of 
things in the world ( Weltreihe ) is impossible, and a beginning of the 
world is a necessary condition of its existence, which was first to be 
proved.” 

This argument is difficult to follow, and suggests a covert appeal to 
causality and the supposed necessity for a first cause. Neglecting this 
aspect of the argument, it would seem that, like most of the arguments 
against infinity, it fails to understand the use of the class-concept and 
the word any. It is supposed — so it would seem — that the events pre- 
ceding a given event ought to be definable by extension, which, if their 
number is infinite, is obviously not the case. “ Completion by successive 
synthesis” seems roughly equivalent to enumeration, and it is true that 
enumeration of an infinite series is practically impossible. But the series 
may be none the less perfectly definable, as the class of terms having a 
specified relation to a specified term. It then remains a question, as 
with all classes, whether the class is finite or infinite; and in the latter 
alternative, as we saw in Part V, that there is nothing self-contradictory. 
In fact, to elicit a contradiction, it would be necessary to state as an 
axiom that every class must have a finite number of terms — an axiom 
which can be refuted, and for which there are no grounds. It seems, 
however, that previous events are regarded by Kant as causes of later 
ones, and that the cause is supposed to be logically prior to the effect. 
This, no doubt, is the reason for speaking of conditions , and for confining 
the antinomy to events instead of moments. If the cause were logically 
prior to the effect, this argument would, I think, be valid ; but we shall 
find, in Part VII, that cause and effect are on the same logical level. 
Thus the thesis of the first antinomy, in so far as it concerns time, must 
be rejected as false, and the argument concerning space, since it depends 
upon that regarding time, falls also. 

Antithesis . “The world has no beginning, and no limits in space, 
but is infinite both in respect of time and space.” The proof of this 
proposition assumes the infinity of pure time and space, and argues that 
these imply events and things to fill them. This view was rejected, as 
regards space, in the preceding chapter, and can be disproved, as regards 



400 


Space [chap, lii 

time, by precisely similar arguments ; it is in any case irrelevant to our 
contention, since no proof is offered that time and space are themselves 
infinite. This, in fact, seems incapable of proof, since it depends upon 
the merely self-evident axiom that there is a moment before any given 
moment, and a point beyond any given point. But as no converse proof 
is valid, we may, in this instance, regard the self-evident as true. 
Whether events had a beginning, and whether matter is bounded by 
empt\ space, are questions which, if our philosophy of space and 
time be sound, no argument independent of causality can decide. 

Second Antinomy. Thesis : “ Every complex substance in the world 
consists of simple parts, and nothing exists anywhere except the simple, 
or what is composed of simple parts.'" Here, again, the argument applies 
to things in space and time, not to space and time themselves. We 
may extend it to space and time, and to all collections, whether existent 
or not. It is indeed obvious that the proposition, true or false, is 
concerned purely with whole and part, and has no special relation to 
space and time. Instead of a complex substance, we might consider the 
n umbel's between 1 and 2, or any other definable collection. And w ith 
this extension, the proof of the proposition must, I think, be admitted ; 
only that term* or concepts should be substituted for .substance#, and 
that, instead of the argument that relations between substances are 
accidental (zufiillig), we should content ourselves with saying that 
relations imply terms, and complexity implies relations. 

Antithesis. “ No complex thing in the world consists of simple parts, 
and nothing simple exists in it anywhere.” The proof of this pro- 
position, as of the first antithesis, assumes, what is alone really interest- 
ing to us, the corresponding property of space. u Space,” Kant says, 
‘‘does not consist of simple parts, but of spaces.” This dogma is 
regarded as self-evident, though all employment of points shows that 
it is not universally accepted. It appeal’s to me that the argument of 
the thesis, extended as I have just suggested, applies to pure space as to 
any other collection, and demonstrates the existence of simple points 
which compose space. As the dogma is not argued, we can only con- 
jecture the grounds upon which it is held. The usual argument from 
infinite division is probably what, influenced Kant. However many parts 
w r e divide a space into, these parts are still spaces, not points. But 
however many parts we divide the stretch of ratios between 1 and 2 
into, the parts are still stretcher*, not single numbers. Thus the argument 
against points proves that there are no numbers, and will equally prove 
that there are no colours or tones. All these absurdities involve a 
covert use of the axiom of finitude, i.e. the axiom that, if a space does 
consist of points, it must consist of some finite number of points. When 
once this is denied, we may admit that no finite number of divisions of 
a space will lead to points, while yet holding every space to be com- 
posed of points. A finite space is a whole consisting of simple parts, 



461 


436 , 436 ] Kant's theory of space 

but not of any finite number of simple parts. Exactly the same thing 
is true of the stretch between 1 and 2. Thus the antinomy is not 
specially spatial, and any answer which is applicable in Arithmetic is 
applicable here also. The thesis, which is an essential postulate of Logic, 
should be accepted, while the antithesis should be rejected. 

Thus Kant’s antinomies do not specially involve space and time: any 
other continuous series, including that of real numbers, raises the same 
problems. And what is more, the properties of space and time, to 
which Kant appeals, are general properties of such series. Other 
antinomies than Kant’s — e.g. that concerning absolute and relative 
position, or concerning the straight line as both a relation and a 
collection of points — have been solved in the preceding chapters of 
this Part. Kant’s antinomies, which involve the difficulties of infinity, 
are by far the most serious, and these being essentially arithmetical, 
have been already solved in Part V. 

436 . Before proceeding to matter and motion, let us briefly re- 
capitulate the results of this Part. Geometry, we said, is the study 
of series having more than one dimension ; and such series arise wherever 
we have a series whose terms are series. This subject is important in 
pure mathematics, because it gives us new kinds of order and new 
methods of generating order. It is important in applied mathematics, 
because at least one series of several dimensions exists, namely, space. 
We found that the abstract logical method, based upon the logic of 
relations, which had served hitherto, was still adequate, and enabled us 
to define all the classes of entities which mathematicians call spaces, 
and to deduce from the definitions all the propositions of the cor- 
responding Geometries. We found that the continuity and infinity 
of a space can always be arithmetically defined, and that no new 
indefinables occur in Geometry. We saw that the philosophical ob- 
jections to points raised by most philosophers are all capable of being 
answered by an amended logic, and that Kant’s belief in the peculiarity 
of geometrical reasoning, and in the existence of certain antinomies 
peculiar to space and time, has been disproved by the modern realization 
of Leibniz’s universal characteristic. Thus, although we discussed no 
problems specially concerned with what actually exists, we incidentally 
answered all the arguments usually alleged against the existence of an 
absolute space. Since common sense affirms this existence, there seems 
therefore no longer any reason for denying it ; and this conclusion, we 
shall find, will give us the greatest assistance in the philosophy of 
Dynamics. 




PART VII. 


MATTER AND MOTION. 




CHAPTER LIII. 


MATTER. 

437 . T hi: nature of matter, even more than that of space, has 
always been regarded as a cardinal problem of philosophy. In the 
present work, however, we are not concerned with the question : What 
is the nature of the matter that actually exists? We are concerned 
merely with the analysis of rational Dynamics considered as a branch 
of pure mathematics, which introduces its subject-matter by definition, 
not by observation of the actual world. Thus we are not confined to 
laws of motion which are empirically verified : non-Newtonian Dynamics, 
like non-Euclidean Geometry, must be as interesting to us as the or- 
thodox system. It is true that philosophical arguments against the 
reality of matter usually endeavour to raise logical objections to the 
notion of matter, and these objections, like the objections to absolute 
space, are relevant to a discussion of mathematical principles. But they 
need not greatly concern us at this stage, as they have mostly been dealt 
with incidentally in the vindication of space. Those who have agreed 
that a space composed of points is possible, will probably agree also 
that matter is possible. But the question of possibility is in any case 
subsequent to our immediate question, which is : What is matter? And 
here matter is to mean, matter as it occurs in rational Dynamics, quite 
independently of all questions as to its actual existence. 

438 . There is— so we decided in Part VI — no logical implication of 
other entities in space. It does not follow, merely because there is 
space, that therefore there are things in it. If we are to believe this, 
we must believe it on new grounds, or rather on what is called the 
evidence of the senses. Thus we arc here taking an entirely new step. 
Among terms which appear to exist, there are, we may say, four great 
classes : (1) instants, (2) points, (3) terms which occupy instants bun not 
points, (4) terms which occupy both points and instants. It seeing to 
be the fact that there are no terms which occupy points but not instcints. 
What is meant bv occupying a point or an instant, analysis caphot 
explain; this is a fundamental relation, expressed by in or at, asym- 
metrical and intransitive, indefinable and simple. It is evident that 
bits of matter are among the terms of (4). Matter or materiality itself, 
the class-concept, is among the terms which do not exist, but bits of 



466 Matter and Motion [chap. Lm 

matter exist both in time and in space. They do not, however, form 
the whole of class (4): there are, besides, the so-called secondary qualities, 
at least colours, which exist in time and space, but are not matter. We 
are not called upon to decide as to the subjectivity of secondary qualities, 
but at least we must agree that they differ from matter. How, then, is 
matter to be defined ? 

439 . There is a well-worn traditional answer to this question. 
Matter, we are told, is a substance, a thing, a subject, of which secondary 
qualities are the predicates. But this traditional answer cannot content 
us. The whole doctrine of subject and predicate, as we have already haa 
occasion to argue, is radically false, and must be abandoned. It may 
questioned whether, without it, any sense other than that of Chapter iv. 
can be made of the notion of thing. We are sometimes told that things 
are organic unities, composed of many parts expressing the whole and 
expressed in the whole. This notion is apt to replace the older notion of 
substance, not, I think, to the advantage of precise thinking. The only 
kind of unity to which I can attach any precise sense — apart from the unity 
of the absolutely simple — is that of a whole composed of parts. But this 
form of unity cannot be what is called organic ; for if the parts express the 
whole or the other parts, they must be complex, and therefore themselves 
contain parts ; if the parts have been analyzed as far as possible, they 
must be simple terms, incapable of expressing anything except them- 
selves. A distinction is made, in support of organic unities, between 
conceptual analysis and real division into parts. What is really indi- 
visible, we are told, may be conceptually analyzable. This distinction, if 
the conceptual analysis be regarded as subjective, seems to me wholly 
inadmissible. All complexity is conceptual in the sense that it is due 
to a whole capable of logical analysis, but is real in the sense that it 
has no dependence upon the mind, but only upon the nature of the 
object. Where the mind can distinguish elements, there must he different 
elements to distinguish ; though, alas! there are often different elements 
which the mind does not distinguish. The analysis of a finite space 
into points is no more objective than the analysis (say) of causality into 
time-sequence + ground and consequent, or of equality into sameness of 
relation to a given magnitude. In every case of analysis, there is a 
whole consisting of parts with relations; it is only the nature of the 
parts and the relations which distinguishes different cases. Thus the 
notion of an organic whole in the above sense must be attributed to 
defective analysis, and cannot be used to explain things. 

It is also said that analysis is falsification, that the complex is not 
equivalent to the sum of its constituents and is changed when analyzed 
into these. In this doctrine, as we saw in Parts I and II, there is a 
measure of truth, when what is to be analyzed is a unity. A proposition 
has a certain indefinable unity, in virtue of which it is an assertion; 
and this is so completely lost by analysis that no enumeration of 
constituents will restore it, even though itself be mentioned as a con- 



438 - 440 ] Matter 467 

stituent. There is, it must be confessed, a grave logical difficulty in 
this fact, for it is difficult not to believe that a whole must be constituted 
by its constituents. For us, however, it is sufficient to observe that 
all unities are propositions or propositional concepts, and that con- 
sequently nothing that exists is a unity. If, therefore, it is maintained 
that things are unities, we must reply that no things exist. 

440 . Thus no fonn of the notion of substance seems applicable 
to the definition of matter. The question remains: How and why is 
matter distinguished from the so-called secondary qualities ? It cannot, 
I think, be distinguished as belonging to a different logical class of 
concepts; the only classes appear to be things, predicates, and relations, 
and both matter and the secondary qualities belong to the first class. 
Nevertheless the world of dynamics is sharply distinguished from that of 
the secondary qualities, and the elementary properties of matter are 
quite different from those of colours. Let us examine these properties 
with a view to definition. 

The most fundamental characteristic of matter lies in the nature of 
its connection with space and time. Two pieces of matter cannot 
occupy the same place at the same moment, and the same piece cannot 
occupy two places at the same moment, though it may occupy two 
moments at the same place. That is, whatever, at a given moment, has 
extension, is not an indivisible piece of matter: division of space always 
implies division of any matter occupying the space, but division of time 
has no corresponding implication. (These properties are commonly 
attributed to matter: I do not wish to assert that they do actually 
belong to it.) By these properties, matter is distinguished from what- 
ever else is in space. Consider colours for example : these possess 
impenetrability, so that no two colours can be in the same place at 
the same time, but they do not possess the other property of matter, 
since the same colour may be in many places at once. Other pairs 
of qualities, as colour and hardness, may also coexist in one place. 
On the view which regarded matter as the subject of which qualities 
were attributes, one piece of colour was distinguished from another 
by the matter whose attribute it was, even when the two colours were 
exactly similar. I should prefer to say that the colour is the same, and 
has no direct relation to the matter in the place. The relation is 
indirect, and consists in occupation of the same place. (I do not wish to 
decide any moot questions as to the secondary qualities, but merely 
to show the difference between the common-sense notions of these and of 
matter respectively.) Thus impenetrability and its converse seem to 
characterize matter sufficiently to distinguish it from whatever else 
exists in space. Two pieces of matter cannot occupy the same place 
and the same time, and one piece of matter cannot occupy two places 
at the same time. But the latter property must be understood of a 
simple piece of matter, one which is incapable of analysis or division. 

Other properties of matter flow from the nature of motion. Fvery 



468 


Matter and Motion 


[chap, liii 

piece of matter persists through time: if it exists once, it would seem 
that it must always exist. It either retains its spatial position, or 
changes it continuously, so that its positions at various times form a 
continuous series in space. Both these properties require considerable 
discussion, which will follow at a later stage. They are purely kine- 
matical, i.e. they involve none of the so-called laws of motion, but only 
the nature of motion itself. 

A controversy has always existed, since early Greek times, as to the 
possibility of a vacuum. The question whether there is a vacuum 
cannot, I think, be decided on philosophical grounds, i.e. no decision is 
possible from the nature of matter or of motion. The answer belong^ 
properly to Science, and therefore none will be suggested here. 

We may sum up the nature of matter as follows. Material unit is a 
class-concept, applicable to w hatever has the following characteristics : 
(1) A simple material unit occupies a spatial point at any moment ; 
tw'o units cannot occupy the same point at the same moment, and one 
cannot occupy two points at the same moment. (2) Every material 
unit persists through time ; its positions in space at any two moments 
may be the same or different; but if different, the positions at times 
intermediate between the two chosen must form a continuous series. 
(3) Two material units differ in the same immediate manner as two 
points or two colours ; they agree in having the relation of inclusion in 
a class to the general concept matter, or rather to the general concept 
material unit. Matter itself seems to be a collective name for all pieces 
of matter, as space for all points and time for all instants. It is thus 
the peculiar relation to space and time which distinguishes matter from 
other qualities, and not any logical difference such as that of subject and 
predicate, or substance and attribute. 

441. We can now attempt an abstract logical statement of what 
rational Dynamics requires its matter to be. In the first place, time 
and space may be replaced by a one-dimensional and w-dimensional 
series respectively. Next, it is plain that the only relevant function of 
a material point is to establish a correlation between all moments 
of time and some points of space, and that this correlation is many -one. 
So soon as the correlation is given, the actual material point ceases to 
have any importance. Thus we may replace a material point by a 
many-one relation whose domain is a certain one-dimensional series, and 
whose converse domain is contained in a certain three-dimensional series. 
To obtain a material universe, so far as kinematical considerations go, 
we have only to consider a class of such relations subject to the condition 
that the logical product of any two relations of the class is to be null. 
This condition insures impenetrability. If we add that the one-dimen- 
sional and the three-dimensional series are to be both continuous, and 
that each many -one relation is to define a continuous function, we have 
all the kinematical conditions for a system of material particles, 
generalized and expressed in terms of logical constants. 



CHAPTER LIV. 


MOTION. 

442 . Much has been written concerning the laws of motion, the 
possibility of dispensing with Causality in Dynamics, the relativity of 
motion, and other kindred questions. But there are several preliminary 
questions, of great difficulty and importance, concerning which little has 
been said. Yet these questions, speaking logically, must be settled before 
the more complex problems usually discussed can be attacked with any 
hope of success. Most of the relevant modern philosophical literature 
will illustrate the truth of these remarks : the theories suggested usually 
repose on a common dogmatic basis, and can be easily seen to be unsatis- 
factory. So long as an author confines himself to demolishing his 
opponents, he is irrefutable; when he constructs his own theory, he 
exposes himself, as a rule, to a similar demolition by the next author. 
Under these circumstances, we must seek some different path, whose 
by-ways remain unexplained. “ Back to Newton ” is the watchword of 
reform in this matter. Newtons scholium to the definitions contains 
arguments which arc unrefuted, and so far as I know, irrefutable : they 
have been before the world two hundred years, and it is time they were 
refuted or accepted. Being unequal to the former, I have adopted the 
latter alternative. 

The concept of motion is logically subsequent to that of occupying 
a place at a time, and also to that of change. Motion is the occupation, 
by one entity, of a continuous series of places at a continuous series of 
times. Change is the difference, in respect of truth or falsehood, between 
a proposition concerning an entity and a time T and a proposition con- 
cerning the same entity and another time T', provided that the two 
propositions differ only hy the fact that T occurs in the one where /' 
occurs in the other. Change is continuous when the propositions of the 
above kind form a continuous series correlated with a continuous series 
of moments. Change thus always involves (1) a fixed entity, (2) a three- 
cornered relation between this entity, another entity, and some hut not all, 
of the moments of time. This is its bare minimum. Mere existence at 
some but not all moments constitutes change on this definition. ( on- 



470 Matter and Motion [chap, liv 

aider pleasure, for example. This, we know, exists at some moments, 
and we may suppose that there are moments when it does not exist. 
Thua there is a relation between pleasure, existence, and some moments, 
which does not subsist between pleasure, existence, and other moments. 
According to the definition, therefore, pleasure changes in passing from 
existence to non-existence or vice verm. This shows that the definition 
requires emendation, if it is to accord with usage. Usage does not 
permit us to speak of change except where what changes is an existent 
throughout, or is at least a class-concept one of whose particulars always 
exists. Thus we should say, in the case of pleasure, that my mind is 
what changes when the pleasure ceases to exist. On the other hand, if 
my pleasure is of different magnitudes at different times, we should say 
the pleasure changes its amount, though we agreed in Part III that not 
pleasure, but only particular amounts of pleasure, are capable of 
existence. Similarly we should say that colour changes, meaning that 
there are different colours at different times in some connection ; though 
not colour, but only particular shades of colour, can exist. And 
generally, where both the class-concept and the particulars are simple, 
usage would allow us to say, if a series of particulars exists at a con- 
tinuous series of times, that the class-concept changes. Indeed it seems 
better to regard this as the only kind of change, and to regard as 
unchanging a term which itself exists throughout a given period of time. 
But if we are to do this, we must say that wholes consisting of existent 
parts do not exist, or else that a whole cannot preserve its identity 
if any of its parts be changed. The latter is the correct alternative, 
but some subtlety is required to maintain it. Thus people say they 
change their minds : they say that the mind changes when pleasure 
ceases to exist in it. If this expression is to be correct, the mind must 
not be the sum of its constituents. For if it were the sum of all its 
constituents throughout time, it w'ould be evidently unchanging ; if it 
were the sum of its constituents at one time, it would lose its identity 
as soon as a former constituent ceased to exist or a new one began 
to exist. Thus if the mind is anything, and if it can change, it must 
be something persistent and constant, to which all constituents of 
a psychical state have one and the same relation. Personal identity 
could be constituted by the persistence of this term, to which all a 
person’s states (and nothing else) would have a fixed relation. The 
change of mind would then consist merely in the fact that these states 
are not the same at &11 times. 

Thus we may say that a term changes, when it has a fixed relation to 
a collection of other terms, each of which exists at some part of time, 
while all do not exist at exactly the same series of moments. Can we 
say, with this definition, that the universe changes ? The universe is a 
somewhat ambiguous term : it may mean all the things that exist at a 
single moment, or all the things that ever have existed or will exist, 



Motion 


471 


442-444] 


or the common quality of whatever exists. In the two former senses it 
cannot change ; in the last, if it be other than existence, it can change. 
Existence itself would not be held to change, though different terms exist 
at different times; for existence is involved in the notion of change as 
commonly employed, which applies only in virtue of the difference 
between the things that exist at different times. On the whole, then, 
we shall keep nearest to usage if we say that the fixed relation, 
mentioned at the beginning of this paragraph, must be that of a simple 
class-concept to simple particulars contained under it. 

443. The notion of change has lieen much obscured by the doctrine 
of substance, by the distinction between a thing"s nature and its external 
relations, and by the pre-eminence of subject-predicate propositions. It 
has been supposed that a thing could, in some way, be different and yet 
the same : that though predicates define a thing, yet it may have different 
predicates at different times. Hence the distinction of the essential and 
the accidental, and a number of other useless distinctions, which were 
(I hope) employed precisely and consciously by the scholastics, but are 
used vaguely and unconsciously by the moderns. Change, in this meta- 
physical sense, I do not at all admit. The so-called predicates of a 
term are mostly derived from relations to other terms ; change is due, 
ultimately, to the fact that many terms have relations to some parts of 
time which they do not have to others. But every term is eternal, 
timeless, and immutable ; the relations it may have to parts of time 
are equally immutable. It is merely the fact that different terms are 
related to different times that makes the difference between what exists 
at one time and what exists at another. And though a term may cease 
to exist, it cannot cease to be ; it is still an entity, which can be counted 
as one , and concerning which some propositions are true and others false. 

444. Thus the important point is the relation of terms to the times 
they occupy, and to existence. Can a term occupy a time without 
existing ? At first sight, one is tempted to say that it can. It is hard 
to deny that Waverley’s adventures occupied the time of the ’45, or 
that the stories in the 1,001 Nights occupy the period of Harun al 
Raschid. I should not say, with Mr Bradley, that these times, are 
not parts of real time ; on the contrary, I should give them a definite 
position in the Christian Era. But I should say that the events are not 
real, in the sen*c that they never existed. Nevertheless, when a term 
exists at a time, there is an ultimate triangular relation, not reducible 
to a combination of separate relations to existence and the time re- 
spectively. This may be shown as follows. If U A exists now 1 " can 
be analyzed into “ A is now” and “ A exists,” where exists is used 
without any tense, we shall have to hold that “ A is then 11 is logically 
possible even if A did not exist then ; for if occupation of a time be 
separable from existence, a term may occupy a time at which it does 
not exist, even if there are other times when it does exist. But, on the 



472 


Matter and Motion 


[chap, liv 

theory in question, 44 A is then " and 44 A exists " constitute the very 
meaning of 44 A existed then, " and therefore, when these two propositions 
Are true, A must have existed then. This can only be avoided by 
denying the possibility of analyzing 44 A exists now " into a combination 
of two-term relations ; and hence non-existential occupation of a time, 
if possible at all, is radically different from the existential kind of 
occupation. 

It should be observed, however, that the above discussion has a 
merely philosophical interest, and is strictly irrelevant to our theme. 
For existence, being a constant term, need not be mentioned, from a 
mathematical point of view, in defining the moments occupied by a tern). 
From the mathematical point of view, change arises from the fact that 
there are propositional functions which are true of some but not all 
moments of time, and if these involve existence, that is a further point 
with which mathematics as such need not concern itself. 

445. Before applying these remarks to motion, we must examine 
the difficult idea of occupying a place at a time. Here again we seem 
to have an irreducible triangular relation. If there is to be motion, we 
must not analyze the relation into occupation of a place and occupation 
of a time. For a moving particle occupies many places, and the essence 
of motion lies in the fact that they are occupied at different times. If 
44 A is here now " were analyzable into 44 A is here " and 44 A is now," it 
would follow that 44 A is there then " is analyzable into 44 A is there 11 
and 44 A is then.’ 1 If all these propositions were independent, we could 
combine them differently : we could, from 44 A is now ” and “A is there," 
infer 44 A is there now, 11 which we know to be false, if A is a material 
point. The suggested analysis is therefore inadmissible. If we are 
determined to avoid a relation of three terms, we may reduce 44 A is 
here now 11 to 44 A's occupation of this place is now." Thus we have a 
relation between this time and a complex concept, A\ occupation of this 
place. But this seems merely to substitute another equivalent proposi- 
tion for the one which it professes to explain. But mathematically, the 
whole requisite conclusion is that, in relation to a given term which 
occupies a place, there is a correlation between a place and a time. 

446. We can now consider the nature of motion, which need not, 
I think, cause any great difficulty. A simple unit of matter, we agreed, 
can only occupy one place at one time. Thus if A be a material point, 
44 A is here now " excludes 44 A is there now," but not 44 A is here then." 
Thus any given moment has a unique relation, not direct, but via A , to 
a single place, whose occupation by A is at the given moment ; but there 
need not be a unique relation of a given place to a given time, since the 
occupation of the place may fill several times. A moment such that 
an interval containing the given moment otherwise than as an end-point 
can be assigned, at anv moment within which interval A is in the same 
place, is a moment when A is at rest. A moment when this cannot be 



Motion 


444-447] 


473 


clone is a moment when A is in motion, provided A occupies some place 
at neighbouring moments on either side. A moment when there are 
such intervals, but all have the said moment as an end-term, is one of 
transition from rest to motion or vice versa . Motion consists in the fact 
that, by the occupation of a place at a time, a correlation is established 
between places and times ; when different times, throughout any period 
however short, are correlated with different places, there is motion ; when 
different times, throughout some period however short, are all correlated 
with the same place, there is rest. 

We may now proceed to state our doctrine of motion in abstract 
logical terms, remembering that material particles are replaced by many- 
one relations of all times to some places, or of all terms of a continuous 
one-dimensional series t to some terms of a continuous three-dimensional 
series s. Motion consists broadly in the correlation of different terms of t 
with different terms of s. A relation R which has a single term of s for 
its converse domain corresponds to a material particle which is at rest 
throughout all time, A relation R which correlates all the terms of / 
in a certain interval with a single term of ,v corresponds to a material 
particle which is at rest throughout the interval, with the possible ex- 
clusion of its end-terms (if any), which may be terms of transition between 
rest and motion. A time of momentary rest is given by any term for 
which the differential coefficient of the motion is zero. The motion is 
continuous if the correlating relation R defines a continuous function. 
It is to be taken as part of the definition of motion that it is continuous, 
and that further it has first and second differential coefficients. This is 
an entirely new assumption, having no kind of necessity, but serving 
merely the purpose of giving a subject akin to rational Dynamics. 

447. It is to be observed that, in consequence of the denial of the 
infinitesimal, and in consequence of the allied purely technical view of 
the derivative of a function, we must entirely reject the notion of a state 
of motion. Motion consists merely in the occupation of different places 
at different times, subject to continuity as explained in Part V. There 
is no transition from place to place, no consecutive moment or con- 
secutive position, no such thing as velocity except in the sense of a real 
number which is the limit of a certain set of quotients. The rejection 
of velocity and acceleration as physical facts (i.c. as properties belonging 
at each instant to a moving point, and not merely real numbers expressing 
limits of certain ratios) involves, as we shall see, some difficulties in the 
Ntatement of the laws of motion ; but the reform introduced by Weier- 
strass in the infinitesimal calculus has rendered this rejection imperative. 



CHAPTER LV. 


CAUSALITY. \ 

\ 

448 . A (jrkat controversy has existed in recent times, among those 
who are interested in the principles of Dynamics, on the question whether 
the notion of causality occurs in the subject or not Kirchoft'* and 
Mach, and, in our own country, Karl Pearson, have upheld the view 
that Dynamics is purely descriptive, while those who adhere to the more 
traditional opinion maintain that it not merely registers sequences, but 
discovers causal connections. This controvei’sy is discussed in a very 
interesting manner in Professor James Ward's Naturidim and Agtiosti- 
cwn, in which the descriptive theory is used to prove that Dynamics 
cannot give metaphysical truths about the real world. But I do not 
find, either in Professor Ward’s book or elsewhere, a very clear statement 
of the issue between the two schools. The practical mathematical form 
of the question arises as regards force, and in this form, there can be no 
doubt that the descriptive school are in the right : the notion of force 
is one which ought not to be introduced into the principles of Dynamics. 
The reasons for this assertion are quite conclusive. Force is the sup- 
posed cause of acceleration : many forces are supposed to concur in 
producing a resultant acceleration. Now an acceleration, as was pointed 
out at the end of the preceding chapter, is a mere mathematical fiction, 
a number, not a physical fact ; and a component acceleration is doubly 
a fiction, for, like the component of any other vector sum, it is not part 
of the resultant, which alone could be supposed to exist. Hence a force, 
if it be a cause, is the cause of an effect which never takes place. But 
this conclusion does not suffice to show that causality never occurs in 
Dynamics. If the descriptive theory were strictly correct, inferences 
from what occurs at some times to what occurs at others would be 
impossible. Such inferences must involve a relation of implication 
between events at different times, and any such relation is in a general 
sense causal. What does appear to be the case is, that the only causality 
occurring in Dynamics requires the whole configuration of the material 
world as a datum, and does not yield relations of particulars to par- 

* Vorkmnym iiber mthemutmkf, Phyrik, Leipzig, 188 . 1 , Vorrede. 



448 , 449 ] Carnality 475 

ticulars, such as are usually called causal. In this respect, there is 
a difficulty in interpreting such seeming causation of particulars by 
particulars as appears, for example, in the law of gravitation. On 
account of this difficulty, it will be necessary to treat causation at some 
length, examining first the meaning to be assigned to the causation of 
particulars by particulars as commonly understood, then the meaning 
of causality which is essential to rational Dynamics, and finally the 
difficulty as regards component acceleration. 

449 . The first subject of the present chapter is the logical nature 
of causal propositions. In this subject there is a considerable difficulty, 
due to the fact that temporal succession is not a relation between events 
directly, but only between moments*. If two events could be successive, 
we could regard causation as a relation of succession holding between 
two events without regard to the time at which they occur. If u A 
precedes B r> (where A and B are actual or possible temporal existents) 
be a true proposition, involving no reference to any actual part of time, 
but only to temporal succession, then we say A causes B. The law of 
causality would then consist in asserting that, among the things which 
actually precede a given particular existent B now> there is always one 
series of events at successive moments which would necessarily have 
preceded B then, just as well as B now ; the temporal relations of B 
to the terms of this series may then be abstracted from all particular 
times, and asserted per se. 

Such would have been the account of causality, if we had admitted 
that events can be successive. But as we have denied this, we require 
a different and more complicated theory. As a preliminary, let us 
examine some characteristics of the causal relation. 

A causal relation between two events, whatever its nature may be, 
certainly involves no reference to constant particular parts of time. It 
is impossible that we should have such a proposition as U A causes B now, 
but not then.'” Such a proposition would merely mean that A exists 
now but not then, and therefore B will exist at a slightly subsequent 
moment, though it did not exist at a time slightly subsequent to the 
former time. But the causal relation itself is eternal : if A had existed 
at any other time, B would have existed at the subset juent moment. 
Thus “ A causes B” has no reference to constant particular parts of time. 

Again, neither A nor B need ever exist, though if A should exist at 
any moment, B must exist at a subsequent moment, and vice versa. In 
all Dynamics (as I shall prove later) we work with causal connections ; 
yet, except when applied to concrete cases, our terms are not existents. 
Their non-existence is, in fact, the mark of what is called rational 
Dynamics. To take another example : All deliberation and choice, all 
decisions as to policies, demand the validity of causal series whose terms 

* See my article in Mind, N.S., No. “Is position in time and space absolute 
or relative ? M * 



476 


Matter and Motion 


[chap, lv 

do not and will not exist. For the rational choice depends upon the 
construction of two causal series, only one of which can be made to 
exist. Unless both were valid, the choice could have no foundation. 
The rejected series consists of equally valid causal connections, but the 
events connected are not to be found among existents. Thus all states- 
manship, and all rational conduct of life, is based upon the method of 
the frivolous historical game, in which we discuss what the world would 
be if Cleopatra’s nose had been half an inch longer. 

A causal relation, we have seen, has no essential reference to existence, 
as to particular parts of time. But it has, none the less, some kind of 
connection with both. If one of its terms is among existents, so is the 
other; if one is non-existent, the other is also non-existent. If one 
of the terms is at one moment, the other is at a later or earlier moment. 
Thus if A causes B , we have also existence implies /Ts” and u A' s 

being at this moment implies 2Ts being at a subsequent moment.” 
These two propositions are implied by “ A causes B” ; the second, at 
least, also implies “ A causes B so that we have here a mutual impli- 
cation. Whether the first also implies “A causes B is a difficult 
question. Some people would hold that two moments of time, or two 
points of space, imply each other’s existence ; yet the relation between 
these cannot be said to be causal. 

It would seem that whatever exists at any part of time has causal 
relations. This is not a distinguishing characteristic of what exists, 
since we have seen that two non-existent terms may be cause and effect. 
But the absence of this characteristic distinguishes terms which cannot 
exist from terms which might exist. Excluding space and time, we may 
define as a possible existent any term which has a causal relation to some 
other term. This definition excludes numbers, and all so-called abstract 
ideas. But it admits the entities of rational Dynamics, which might 
exist, though we have no reason to suppose that they do. 

If we admit (what seems undeniable) that whatever occupies any 
given time is both a cause and an effect, we obtain a reason for either 
the infinity or the circularity of time, and a proof that, if there are 
events at any part of time, there always have been and always will be 
events. If, moreover, we admit that a single existent A can be isolated 
as the cause of another single existent J5, which in turn causes C, then 
the world consists of as many independent causal series as there are 
existents at any one time. This leads to an absolute Leibnizian 
monadism — a view which has always been held to be paradoxical, and 
to indicate an error in the theory from which it springs. Let us, then, 
return to the meaning of causality, and endeavour to avoid the paradox 
of independent causal series. 

450 . The proposition “ A causes Z/” is, as it stands, incomplete. 
The only meaning of which it seems capable is “ A's existence at any 
time implies S ' s existence at some future time.” It has always been 



449 - 461 ] Causality 477 

customary to suppose that cause and effect must occupy consecutive 
moments ; but as time is assumed to be a compact series, there cannot 
be any consecutive moments, and the interval between any two moments 
will always be finite. Thus in order to obtain a more complete causal 
proposition, we must specify the interval* between A and B. A causal 
connection then asserts that the existence of A at any one time implies 
the existence of B after an interval which is independent of the parti- 
cular time at which A existed. In other words, we assert : “ There is 
an interval t such that existence at any time t Y implies ZTs existence 
at a time This requires the measurement of time, and con- 

sequently involves either temporal distance, or magnitude of divisibility, 
which last we agreed to regard as not a motion of pure mathematics. 
Thus if our measure is effected by means of distance, our proposition is 
capable of the generalization which is required for a purely logical 
statement. 

461. A very difficult question remains — the question which, when 
the problem is precisely stated, discriminates most dearly between 
monism and monadism. Can the causal relation hold between particular 
events, or does it hold only between the whole present state of the universe 
and the whole subsequent state? Or can we take a middle position, 
and regard one group of events now as causally connected with one group 
at another time, but not with any other events at that other time ? 

I will illustrate this difficulty by the case of gravitating particles. 
Let there be three particles A, B, C. We say that B and C both 
cause accelerations in A, and we compound these two accelerations 
by the parallelogram law. But this composition is not truly addition, 
for the components are not parts of the resultant. The resultant is 
a new r term, as simple as its components, and not by any means their 
sum. Thus the effects attributed to B and C are never produced, but 
a third term different from either is produced. This, we may say, is 
produced by B and C together, taken as one whole. But the effect 
which they produce as a whole can only be discovered by supposing 
each to produce a separate effect : if this were not supposed, it would be 
impossible to obtain the two accelerations whose resultant is the actual 
acceleration. Thus we seem to reach an antinomy: the whole has no 
effect except what results from the effects of the parts, but the effects of 
the parts are non-existent. 

The examination of this difficulty will rudely shake our cherished 
prejudices concerning causation. The laws of motion, we shall find, 
actually contradict the received view, and demand a quite different and 
far more complicated view. In Dynamics, we shall find (1) that the 
causal relation holds between events at three times, not at two; (2) that 
the whole state of the material universe at two of the three times is 
necessary to the statement of a causal relation. In order to provide for 
this conclusion, let us re-examine causality in a less conventional spirit. 



478 Matter and Motion [chap, lv 

452. Causality, generally, is the principle in virtue of wjiich, from 
a sufficient number of events at a sufficient number of moments, one or 
more events at one or more new moments can be inferred. Let us 
suppose, for example, that, by means of the principle, if we are given e x 
events at a time t l9 e „ at a time t 29 ...e n at a time t n9 then we can infer 
€ n + 1 events at a time J n+1 . If, then, e r+} 5 e n an <l if the times t r are 
arbitrary, except that t r + x is after t r , it follows that, from the original 
data, we can infer certain events at all future times. For we may 
choose e x of the events e^...e n of the events e n + l9 and infer e M+1 events 
at a new time Hence by means of our supposed law, inference to 

future times is assured. And if, for any value of r, e r+1 >e r9 then move 
than e n+l events can be inferred at the time t n+2y since there are several 
ways of choosing e r events out of e r+l events. But if for any value of 
e r + x >e ry then inference to the past becomes in general impossible. In 
order that an unambiguous inference to the past may be possible, it is 
necessary that the implication should be reciprocal, i.e . that e } events at 
time t x should be implied by e. 2 at t 2 ...c n + 1 at t n+1 . But some inference 
to the past is possible without this condition, namely, that at time t x 
there were e x events implying, with the others up to t ny the c w+1 events 
at time f H+1 . But even this inference soon fails if, for any value of r, 
*V+i > e r9 since, after inferring e x events at time t l9 e r for the next inference 
takes the place of e r+19 but is too small to allow the inference. Thus if 
unambiguous inference to any part of time is to be possible, it is necessary 
and sufficient (1) that any one of the ji + l groups of events should be 
implied by the other n groups; (2) that c r = <? r+1 f° r all values of r. 
Since causality demands the possibility of such inference, we may take 
these two conditions as satisfied. 

Another somewhat complicated point is the following. If e 1 e»...e H 
cause c n +i, an( l cause e n+2 and so on, we have an independent 

causal series, and a return to monadism, though the monad is now complex, 
being at each moment a group of events. But this result is not 
necessary. It may happen that only certain groups e x . ,e n allow 
inference to e n + x , and that e 2 c 3 ...c ft , e u+1 is not such a group. Thus 
suppose e\ e'.j . . ,e A simultaneous with e x ...e n9 and causing It may 

be that r, e 3 ...e n e H+l and e\ t\...e n e u + 1 form the next causal groups, 
causing e n + 2 and respectively. In this way no independent causal 
series will arise, in spite of particular causal sequences. This however 
remains a mere possibility, of which, so far as I know, no instance 
occurs. 

Do the general remarks on the logical nature of causal propositions 
still hold good ? Must we suppose the causal relation to hold directly 
between the events e x e 2 ...e H + x , and merely to imply their temporal 
.succession ? There are difficulties in this view. For, having recognized 
that consecutive times are impossible, it has become necessaiy to assume 
finite intervals of time between e x and e 29 e 2 and e 3 etc. Hence the length 



452 ] Causality 479 

of these intervals must be specified, and thus a mere reference to events, 
without regard to temporal position, becomes impossible. All we can 
say is, that only relative position is relevant. Given a causal relation 
in which the times are t„ this relation will still be valid for times T + t r . 
Thus the ultimate statement seems to be: given m events at any 
moment, m other events at a moment whose distance from the first 
is specified, and so on till we have n groups of events, then m new* events 
can be inferred at any new moment whose distance from the first is 
specified, provided m and n have suitable values, and the groups of 
events be suitably chosen — where, however, the values to be assigned 
to m and n may depend upon the nature of the events in question. For 
example, in a material system consisting of N particles, we shall have 
m =s N 9 n = 2. Here m depends upon the nature of the material system 
in question. What circumstances obtain in Psychology, it is as yet 
impossible to say, since psychologists have failed to establish any strict 
causal laws. 

Thus rational Dynamics assume that, in an independent material 
system, the configurations at any two moments imply the configuration 
at any other moment. This statement is capable of translation into 
the language of pure mathematics, as we shall see in the next chapter. 
But it remains a question what we are to say concerning such causation 
of particulars by particulars as appear ,v to be involved in such principles 
as the law of gravitation. But this discussion must be postponed until 
we have examined the so-called laws of motion. 



CHAPTER LVL 


DEFINITION OF A DYNAMICAL WORLD. 

453. Bkfouk proceeding to the laws of motion, which introduce new 
complications of which some are difficult to express in terms of pure 
mathematics, I wish briefly to define in logical language the dynamical 
world as it results from previous chapters. 

Let t be a one-dimensional continuous series, ,v a .three-dimensional 
continuous series, which we will not assume to lx? Euclidean as yet. 
If If be a many-one relation whose domain is t and whose converse 
domain is contained in .y, then R defines a motion of a material particle. 
The indestructibility and ingenerability of matter are expressed in the 
fact that R has the whole of t for its field. Let us assume further that 
R defines a continuous function in .v. 

In order to define the motions of a material system, it is only 
necessary to consider a class of relations having the properties assigned 
above to R , and such that the logical product of any two of them 
is null. This last condition expresses impenetrability. For it asserts 
that no two of our relations relate the same moment to the same point, 
i.e. no two particles can be at the same place at the same time. A 
set of relations fulfilling these conditions will be called a class of 
kinematical motions . 

With these conditions, we have all that kinematics requires for the 
definition of matter; and if the descriptive school were wholly in the 
right, our definition would not add the new condition which takes 
us from kinematics to kinetics. Nevertheless this condition is essential 
to inference from events at one time to events at another, without which 
Dynamics would lose its distinctive feature. 

454. A generalized form of the statement of causality which we 
require is the following: A class of kinetic viotions is a class of kine- 
matical motions such that, given the relata of the various component 
relations at n given times, the relata at all times are determinate. In 
ordinary Dynamics we have » = 2, and this assumption may be made 
without the loss of any interesting generality. Our assertion then 
amounts to saying that there is a certain specific many-one relation 



481 


453, 454] Definition of a Dynamical World 

which holds between any two configurations and their times and any 
third time, as referent, and the configuration at the third time as 
relatum ; in ordinary language, given two configurations at two given 
times, the configuration at any other time is determinate. Formally, 
the principle of causality in this form may be stated as follows. If N 
be a relation which is any one of our motions, and t any time, let H t be 
the relation holding only between t and the term to which t has the 
relation if. If K be the whole class of motions, let K t be the whole 
class of such terms as R t . Then Kt expresses the configuration of the 
system at the time t. Now let t\ f be any other two times. Then K 
is a class of kinetic motions if there is a many -one relation *V, the same 
for any three times, which holds between the class whose terms are 
t\ t'\ AY A^, as referent and the configuration AY as relatum. 

The particular causal laws of the particular universe considered are 
given when S is given, and vice versa*. We may treat of a whole set 
of universes agreeing in having the same S, i.e. the same causal laws, 
and differing only in respect of the distribution of matter, i.e. the 
class K. This is the ordinary procedure of rational Dynamics, which 
commonly defines its S in the way believed to apply to the actual world, 
and uses its liberty only to imagine different material systems. 

It will be observed that, owing to the rejection of the infinitesimal, 
it is necessary to give an integrated form to our general law of causality. 
We cannot introduce velocities and accelerations into statements of 
general principles, though they become necessary as soon as we descend 
to the laws of motion. A large part of Newton’s laws, as we shall 
see in the next chapter, is contained in the above definition, but the 
third law introduces a radical novelty, and gives rise to the difficulty as 
to the causation of particulars by particulars, which we have mentioned 
but not yet examined. 

* In the Dynamics applicable to the actual world, the specification of 8 requires 
the notion of mass. 



CHAPTER LVII. 


NEWTON’S LAWS OF MOTION. 

405 . Thk present chapter will adopt, for the moment, a naive 
attitude towards Newton’s Laws. It will not examine whether they 
really hold, or whether there are other really ultimate laws applying to 
the ether; its problem is merely to give those laws a meaning. 

The first thing to be remembered is— what physicists now-a-days 
will scarcely deny — that force is a mathematical fiction, not a physical 
entity. The second point is that, in virtue of the philosophy of the 
calculus, acceleration is a mere mathematical limit, and does not itself 
express a definite state of an accelerated particle. It may be remembered 
that, in discussing derivatives, we inquired whether it was possible to 
regard them otherwise than as limits — whether, in fact, they could 
be treated as themselves fractions. This we found impossible. In this 
conclusion there was nothing new, but its application in Dynamics will 
yield much that is distinctly new. It has been customary to regard 
velocity and acceleration as physical facts, and thus to regard the laws 
of motion as connecting configuration and acceleration. This, however, 
as an ultimate account, is forbidden to us. It becomes necessary to 
seek a more integrated form for the laws of motion, and this form, as is 
evident, must be one connecting three configurations. 

466 . The first law of motion is regarded sometimes as a definition 
of equal times. This view is radically absurd. In the first place, equal 
times have no definition except as times whose magnitude is the same. 
In the second place, unless the first law told us when there is no acceler- 
ation (which it does not do), it would not enable us to discover what 
motions are uniform. In the third place, if it is always significant to 
say that a given motion is uniform, there can be no motion by which 
uniformity is defined. In the fourth place, science holds that no 
motion occurring in nature is uniform ; hence there must be a meaning 
of uniformity independent of all actual motions— and this definition is, 
the description of equal absolute distances in equal absolute times. 

The first law, in Newton's form, asserts that velocity is unchanged in 
the absence of causal action from some other piece of matter. As it 



483 


455 - 458 ] Newtons Lares of Motion 

stands, this law is wholly confused. It tells us nothing as to how 
we are to discover causal action, or as to the circumstances under which 
causal action occurs. But an important meaning may be found for it, 
by remembering that velocity is a fiction, and that the only events that 
occur in any material system are the various positions of its various 
particles. If we then assume (as all the laws of motion tacitly do) that 
there is to be some relation between different configurations, the law 
tells us that such a relation can only hold between three configurations, 
not between two. For two configurations are required for velocity, and 
another for change of velocity, which is what the law asserts to be 
relevant. Thus in any dynamical system, when the special laws (other 
than the laws of motion) which regulate that system are specified, the 
configuration at any given time can be inferred when two configura- 
tions at two given times are known. 

457 . The second and third laws introduce the new idea of maw ; 
the third also gives one respect in which acceleration depends upon 
configuration. 

The second law* as it stands is worthless. For we know nothing 
about the impressed force except that it produces change of motion, 
and thus the law might seem to be a mere tautology. But by relating 
the impressed force to the configuration, an important law may lx? 
discovered, which is as follows. In any material system consisting 
of n particles, there are certain constant coefficients (masses) m l , m, z . ..m n 
to be associated with these particles respectively; and when these 
coefficients are considered as forming part of the configuration, then m l 
multiplied by the corresponding acceleration is a certain function of the 
momentary configuration ; this is the same function for all times and all 
configurations. It is also a function dependent only upon the relative 
positions : the same configuration in another part of space will lead to the 
same accelerations. That is, if .r r , y r , z r be the coordinates of m r at time 
tf, avc have a 1 ,. = f r (t) etc., and 

•i'i = F (wj, /« fl , w< 3 , ... tu n , * z'.j —J’] , if 3 — ... «r >4 — J’i, ...). 

This involves the assumption that = f (r) is a function having a second 
differential coefficient Jl\ ; the use of the equation involves the further 
assumption that i\ has a first and second integral. The above, how- 
ever, is a very specialized form of the second law ; in its general form, 
the function F may involve other coefficients than the masses, and 
velocities as well as positions. 

458 . The third law is very interesting, and allows the analysis 
of F into a vector sum of functions each depending only on tn x and one 
other particle m r and their relative position. It asserts that the 
acceleration of w, is made up of component accelerations having special 
reference respectively * to 7/i a , ... m n ; and if these components be 



Mattel m and Motion 


484 


[chap, lvii 


•••«/!»> it asserts that the acceleration of any other particle m r has a 
corresponding component f Tl such that 

m rfr\ ~ ” 

This law leads to the usual properties of the centre of mass. For if 
i\ 2 be the j-component of f 29 wp have ra, x Yl + a\ 21 = 0, and thus 

2 2 m r dr r8 = 0. 

r s 

Again, the special reference of f vi to rn 2 can only be a reference to the 
mass //i 3 , the distance r 12 , and the direction of the line 12; for these afre 
the only intrinsic relations of the two particles. It is often specified as 
part of the third law that the acceleration is in the direction 12, and 
this seems worthy to l>e included, as specifying the dependence of 
f vx upon the line 12. Thus f vl is along 12, and 

/l2 =^K, W*, r„), 

f* 1 = 0 (777s, 77?!, 7* 12 ) 

and 7/i, <f> (//?,, ? n. 2 , r V2 ) = — m 2 <f) (m.,, m u - r w ), 

or, measuring f u from 1 towards 2, and f. n from 2 towards 1, both w ill 
have the same sign, and 

7/1, <f> (t71„ 7/7.,, r u ) = VU <f) (nit, 777,, 7*, a ). 

Hence 7/7, <^(7/1,, 777 2 , 7* 12 ) is a symmetrical function of r//, and t?/ 2 , say 

tw«, r,„). 

Thus f n =l~yjr (7/i„ 7/7., r 12 ), 

77 * | 

/ a = ;^r 

7/7 o 

Thus the resultant acceleration of each particle is analyzahle into 
components depending only upon itself and one other particle; but 
this analysis applies only to the statement in terms of acceleration. No 
such analysis is possible when we compare, not configuration and accelera- 
tion, but three configurations. At anv moment, though the change of 
distance and straight line 12 is not due to m l and alone, yet the 
acceleration of 7/7, consists of components each of which is the same 
it would be if there were only one other particle in the field. But 
where a finite time is in question this is no longer the case. The total 
change in the position of m x during a time t is not what it would have 
been if tk, had first operated alone for a time t, then m t alone and so on. 
Thus we cannot speak of any total effect of m, or of 77i 3 ; and since 
momentary effects are fictions, there are really no independent effects of 
separate particles on rn l . The statement by means of accelerations is 
to be regarded as a mathematical device, not as though there really 
were an actual acceleration which is caused in one particle by one other. 
And thus we escape the very grave difficulty which we should otherwise 



485 


458, 459] A T eictons Lares of Motion 

have to meet, namely, that the component accelerations, not being 
(in general) parts of the resultant acceleration, would not be actual 
even if we allowed that acceleration is an actual fact. 

459. The first two laws are completely contained in the following 
statement : In any independent system, the configuration at any time is 
a function of that time and of the configurations at two given times, 
provided we include in configuration the masses of the various particles 
composing the system. The third law adds the further fact that the 
configuration can be analyzed into distances and straight lines ; the 
function of the configuration which represents the acceleration of any 
particle is a vector-sum of functions containing only one distance, one 
straight line, and two masses each — moreover, if we accept the addition 
to the third law spoken of above, each of these functions is a vector 
along the join of the two particles which enter into it. But for this 
law, it might happem that the acceleration of //^ would imolve the area 
of the triangle 1 2 53, or the volume of the tetrahedron 1 L 1 4 ; and but 
for this law, we should not have the usual properties of the centre of mass. 

The three laws together, as now expounded, give the greater part of 
the law of gravitation ; this law merely tells us that, so far as gravitation 
is concerned, the above function 

yfr(m i, w a , rjssiw, w a 

It should be remembered that nothing is known, from the laws of motion, 
as to the form of and that we might have eg. ^ = 0 if r u > K. If 
yjr had this form, provided H were small compared to sensible distances, 
the world would seem as though there were no action at a distance. 

It is to lx? observed that the first two laws, according to the above 
analysis, merely state the general form of the law of causality explained 
in Chapter i.v. From this it results that we shall be able, with the 
assumptions commonly made as to continuity and the existence of first 
and second derivatives, to determine a motion completely when the 
configuration and velocities at a given instant are given ; and in par- 
ticular, these data will enable us to determine the acceleration at the 
given instant. The third law and the law of gravitation together add 
the further properties that the momentary accelerations depend only 
upon the momentary configuration, not upon the momentary velocities, 
and that the resultant acceleration of any particle is the \ec tor-sum 
of components each dependent only on the masses and distances of the 
given particle and one other. 

The question whether Newtonian Dynamics applies in such problems 
as those of the motion of the ether is an interesting and important one ; 
but in so far as it deals w ith the truth or falsehood of the laws of motion 
in relation to the actual world, it is for us irrelevant. For us, as pure 
mathematicians, the Jaws of motion and the law of gravitation are not 
properly laws at all. but parts of the definition of a certain kind of matter. 



486 


Matter and Motion 


[chap, lvii 

460. By the above account the view of causality which has usually 
satisfied philosophers is contravened in two respects, (1) in that the 
relation embodied in a causal law holds between three events, not 
between two ; (2) in that the causal law has the unity of a formula or 
function, i.e. of a constant relation, not merely that derived from 
repetition of the same cause. The first of these is necessitated by modern 
theories of the infinitesimal calculus ; the second was always necessary, 
at least since Newton’s time. Both demand some elucidation. 

(1) The whole essence of dynamical causation is contained in t}ie 
following equation : if t i9 t 2 be specified times, C\ 9 C« the corresponding 
configurations of any self-contained system, and C the configuration 
at any time t 9 then 

C=F(C\ 9 t }9 C 29 t 29 t) 

(a compressed form for as many equations as C has coordinates). The 
form of /’depends only upon the number of particles and the dynamical 
laws of the system, not upon the choice of C x or C„ The cause must 
be taken to be the two configurations C\ and C 29 and the interval t 2 — t x 
may be any we please. Further t may fall between and L, or before 
both. The effect is any single one of the coordinates of the system 
at time t 9 or any collection of these coordinates ; but it seems better to 
regard each coordinate as one effect, since each is given in one equation. 
Thus the language of cause and effect has to lx* greatly strained to 
meet the case, and seems scarcely worth preserving. The cause is two 
states of the whole system, at times as far apart as we please ; the 
effect is one coordinate of the system at any time before, after, or 
between the times in the cause. Nothing could well be more unlike the 
views which it has pleased philosophers to advocate. Thus on the 
whole it is not worth while preserving the word cause : it is enough 
to say, what is far less misleading, that any two configurations allow 
us to infer any other. 

(2) The causal law regulating any system is contained in the 
form of F. The law does not assert that one event A will always 
be followed by another B ; if A be the configuration of the system at 
one time, nothing can be inferred as to that at another ; the configura- 
tion might recur without a recurrence of any configuration that formerly 
followed it. If A be two configurations whose distance in time is given, 
then indeed our causal law does tell us what configurations will follow 
them, and if A recurred, so would its consequences. But if this were 
all that our causal law told us, it would afford cold comfort, since no 
configuration ever does actually recur. Moreover, we should need an 
infinite number of causal laws to meet the requirements of a system 
which has successively an infinite number of configurations. What our 
law does is to assert that an infinite class of effects have each the same 
functional relation to one of an infinite class of causes ; and this is done 
by means of a formula One formula connects any three configurations, 



460 , 461 ] Newtons Laws of Motion 487 

and but for this fact continuous motions would not be amenable to causal 
laws, which consist in specifications of the formula. 

461 . I have spoken hitherto of independent systems of n particles. 
It remains to examine whether any difficulties are introduced by the fact 
that, in the dynamical world, there are no independent systems short of 
the material universe. We have seen that no effect can be ascribed, 
within a material system, to any one part of the system ; the whole 
system is necessary for any inference as to what will happen to one 
particle. The only effect traditionally attributed to the action of a 
single particle on another is a component acceleration ; but (a) this 
is not part of the resultant acceleration, (/9) the resultant acceleration 
itself is not an event, or a physical fact, but a mere mathematical limit. 
Hence nothing can be attributed to particular particles. But it may be 
objected that we cannot know the whole material universe, and that, 
since no effect is attributable to any part as such, we cannot consequently 
know anything about the effect of the whole. For example, in calculating 
the motions of planets, we neglect the fixed stars ; we pretend that the 
solar system is the whole universe. By what right, then, do we assume 
that the effects of this feigned universe in any wav resemble those of the 
actual universe ? 

The answer to this question is found in the law of gravitation. We 
can show that, if we compare the motions of a particle in a number 
of universes differing only as regards the matter at a greater distance 
than R, while much within this distance all of them contain much 
matter, then the motion of the particle in question relatively to the 
matter well within the distance R will be approximately the same in 
all the universes*. This is possible because, by the third law, a kind 
of fictitious analysis into partial effects' is possible. Thus we can ap- 
proximately calculate the effect of a universe of which part only is 
known. We must not say that the effect of the fixed stars is insensible, 
for we assume that they have no effect per ,se ; we must say that the 
effect of a universe in which they exist differs little from that of one in 
which they do not exist ; and this we are able to prove in the case of 
gravitation. Speaking broadly, we require (recurring to our previous 
function <f>) that, if € be any number, however small, there should be 

some distance R such that, recurring to our previous function <^, if ^ 

denote differentiation in any direction, then 

iiy( r)dr<€ if r>K 

When this condition is satisfied, the difference between the relative 
accelerations of two particles within a certain region, which results from 
assuming different distributions of matter at a distance greater than R 
from a certain point within the region, wdll have an assignable upper 
limit ; and hence there is an upper limit to the error incurred by pre- 
* This is true only of rrJutive, not of absolute motions. 



488 Matter and Motion [chap. Lvn 

tending that there is no matter outside the space of radius R. Hence 
approximation becomes possible in spite of the fact that the whole 
universe is involved in the exact determination of any motion. 

The above leads to two observations of some interest. First, no law 
which does not satisfy the above inequality is capable of being practically 
applied or tested. The assumption that gravity varies as the direct 
distance, for example, could only be tested in a finite universe. And in 
all phenomena, such as those of electricity, we must assume, where the 
total effect is a sum or integral, or is calculated by means of a sum or 
integral, that the portion contributed to relative motions by large values 
of r is small. Secondly, the denial of any partial effect of a part is 
quite necessary if we are to apply our formulae to an infinite universe 
in the form of integrals. For an integral is not really an infinite sum, 
but the limit of a finite sum. Thus if each particle had a partial effect, 
the total effect of an infinite number of particles would not be an in- 
tegral. But though an integral cannot represent an infinite sum, there 
seems no reason whatever why it should not represent the effect of a 
universe which has an infinite number of pails. If there are finite 
volumes containing an infinite number of particles, the notion of mass 
must lie modified so as to apply no longer to single particles, but to 
infinite classes of particles. The density at a point will then be not the 
mass of that point, but the differential coefficient, at the point, of the 
mass with respect to the volume. 

It should be observed that the impossibility of an independent system 
short of the whole universe does not result from the laws of motion, but 
from the special laws, such as that of gravitation, which the laws of 
motion lead us to seek. 

462. The laws of motion, to conclude, have no vestige of self- 
evidence ; on the contrary, they contradict the form of causality which 
has usually been considered evident. Whether they are ultimately valid, 
or are merely approximate generalizations, must remain doubtful ; the 
more so as, in all their usual forms, they assume the truth of the axiom 
of parallels, of which we have so far no evidence. The laws of motion, 
like the axiom of parallels in regal'd to space, may be viewed either as 
parts of a definition of a class of possible material universes, or as empiri- 
c-ally verified assertions concerning the actual material universe. But in 
no way can they Ik? taken as a priori truths necessarily applicable to any 
possible material world. The a priori truths involved in Dynamics are 
only those of logic : as a system of deductive reasoning, Dynamics re- 
quires nothing further, while as a science of what exists, it requires 
experiment and observation. Those who have admitted a similar 
conclusion in Geometry are not likely to question it here; but it is 
important to establish separately every instance of the principle that 
knowledge as to what exists is never derivable from general philosophical 
considerations, but is always and wholly empirical. 



CHAPTER LVIII. 


ABSOLUTE AND RELATIVE MOTION. 

463. Ix the justly famous scholium to the definitions, Newton has 
stated, with admirable precision, the doctrine of absolute space, time, 
and motion. Not being a skilled philosopher, he was unable to give 
grounds for his views, except an empirical argument derived from actual 
Dynamics. Leibniz, frith an unrivalled philosophical equipment, con- 
troverted Newton’s position in his letters against Clarke* * * § ; and the 
victory, in the opinion of subsequent philosophers, rested wholly with 
Leibniz. Although it would seem that Kant, in the Transcendental 
Aesthetic, inclines to absolute position in space, vet in the Mctaphymche 
Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissowhaft he quite definitely adopts the 
relational view. Not only other philosophers, but also men of science, 
have been nearly unanimous in rejecting absolute motion, the latter on 
the ground that it is not capable of being observed, and cannot therefore 
be a datum in an empirical study. 

But a great difficulty has always remained as regards the argument 
from absolute rotation, adduced by New ton himself. This argument, in 
spite of a definite assertion that all motion is relative, is accepted and 
endorsed by Clerk Maxwell f. It has been revived and emphasized by 
Heymans}, combated by Mach§, Karl Pearson ||, and many others, and 
made part of the basis of a general attack on Dynamics in Professor 
Ward’s Naturalism and Agnosticism. Let us first state the argument in 
various forms, and then examine some of the attempts to reply to it. 
For us, since absolute time and space have been admitted, there is no 
need to avoid absolute motion, and indeed no possibility of doing so. 
But if absolute motion is in any case unavoidable, this affords a new 
argument in favour of the justice of our logic, which, unlike the logic 
current among philosophers, admits and even urges its possibility. 

* Phil . I Verier, ed. (ierhardt, VoL vn. 

t Matter and Motion , Art. i v. Contrast Art. xxx. 

J Die Gesetze and Etemente dm vimuechuftlkken Deukeim, Leyden, 1880. 

§ Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwiikelung, Leipzig, 188.'). (Translated, London, 1802.) 

|| Grammar of Science, London, 1882. (2nd edition, 1 800. ) 



490 Mattel' and Motion [chap, lviii 

464 . If a bucket containing water is rotated, Newton observes, the 
water will become concave and mount up the sides of the bucket. But 
if the bucket be left at rest in a rotating vessel, the water will remain 
level in spite of the relative rotation. Thus absolute rotation is involved 
in the phenomenon in question. Similarly, from Foucault’s pendulum 
and other similar experiments, the rotation of the earth can be demon- 
strated, and could be demonstrated if there were no heavenly bodies in 
relation to which the rotation becomes sensible. But this requires us to 
admit that the earth’s rotation is absolute. Simpler instances may be 
given, such as the case of two gravitating particles. If the motion dealt 
with in Dynamics were wholly relative, these particles, if they constituted 
the whole universe, could only move in the line joining them, and would 
therefore ultimately fall into one another. But Dynamics teaches that, 
if they have initially a relative velocity not in the line joining them, 
they will describe conics about their common centre of gravity as focus. 
And generally, if acceleration be expressed in polars, there are terms 
in the acceleration which, instead of containing several differentials, 
contain squares of angular velocities : these terms require absolute 
angular velocity, and are inexplicable so long as relative motion is 
adhered to. 

If the law of gravitation be regarded as universal, the point may be 
stated as follows. The laws of motion require to be stated by reference 
to what have been (ailed kinetic axes : these are in reality axes having 
no absolute acceleration and no absolute rotation. It is asserted, for 
example, when the third law is combined with the notion of mass, that, 
if wi, iri be the masses of two particles between which there is a force, 
the component accelerations of the two particles due to this force are 
in the ratio m 2 : m x . But this will only be true if the accelerations 
are measured relatively to axes which themselves have no acceleration. 
We cannot here introduce the centre of mass, for, according to the 
principle that dynamical facts must be, or be derived from, observable 
data, the masses, and therefore the centre of mass, must be obtained 
from the acceleration, and not vice verm . Hence any dynamical motion, 
if it is to obey the laws of motion, must be referred to axes which are 
not subject to any forces. But, if the law of gravitation be accepted, 
no mateiial axes will satisfy this condition. Hence we shall have to 
take spatial axes, and motions relative to these are of course absolute 
motions. 

465 . In order to avoid this conclusion, C. Neumann* assumes as an 
essential part of the laws of motion the existence, somewhere, of an 
absolutely rigid “ Body Alpha? bv reference to which all motions are 
to l)e estimated. This suggestion misses the essence of the discussion, 
which is (or should be) as to the logical meaning of dynamical pro- 


* Die UalHei-Newtmi*che Tbeorie, Leipzig, 1870, p. 15. 



401 


464 - 467 ] Absolute and Relative Motion 

positions, not as to the way in which they are discovered. It seems 
sufficiently evident that, if it is necessary to invent a fixed body, purely 
hypothetical and serving no purpose except to be fixed, the reason is 
that what is really relevant is a fixed place, and that the body occupying 
it is irrelevant. It is true that Neumann does not incur the vicious 
circle which would be involved in saying that the Body Alpha is fixed, 
while all motions are relative to it ; he asserts that it is rigid, but 
rightly avoids any statement as to its rest or motion, which, in his 
theory, would be wholly unmeaning. Nevertheless, it seems evident 
that the question whether one body is at rest or in motion must have 
as good a meaning as the same question concerning any other body ; 
and this seems sufficient to condemn Neumann’s suggested escape from 
absolute motion. 

466 . A development of Neumann’s views is undertaken by Streintz*, 
who refers motions to what he calls “fundamental bodies” and 44 fun- 
damental axes.” These are defined as lx>dies or axes which do not rotate 
and are independent of all outside influences. Streintz follows Kants 
Anfangsgriinde in regarding it as possible to admit absolute rotation 
while denying absolute translation. This is a view which I shall discuss 
shortly, and which, as we shall see, though fatal to what is desired of 
the relational theory, is yet logically tenable, though Streintz does not 
show that it is so. But aj>art from this question, two objections may 
be made to his theory. (1) If motion means motion relative to fun- 
damental bodies (and if not, their introduction is no gain from a logical 
point of view), then the law of gravitation becomes strictly meaningless 
if taken to be universal — a view which seems impossible to defend. I he 
theory requires that there should be matter not subject to any forces, 
and this is denied by the law of gravitation. The point is not so much 
that universal gravitation must be true, as that it must be significant — 
whether true or false is an irrelevant question. (2) We have already 
seen that absolute accelerations are required even as regards translations, 
and that the failure to perceive this is due to overlooking the fact that 
the centre of mass is not a piece of matter, but a spatial point which is 
only determined by means of accelerations. 

467 . Somewhat similar remarks apply to Mr W. H. Macaulay's article 
on 44 Newton’s Theory of Kinetics f.” Mr Macaulay asserts that the true 
way to state Newton’s theory (omitting points irrelevant to the present 
issue) is as follows: “Axes of reference can be so chosen, and the 
assignment of masses so arranged, that a certain decomposition of 
the rates of change of momenta, relative to the axes, of all the particles 
of the universe is possible, namely one in which the components occur 

* /He plnpikatixchen Grundtngen der Merhanik, Leipzig, 1883 ; see esp. pp. 24, 25. 

t Bulletin of the American Math. Sot\, Vol. m. (1890-7). For a later statement 
of Mr Macaulay’s views, see Art. Motion, Lawx of, in the new volumes of the hitcyc/. 
Brit . (Vol. xxxi). 



402 


Mattel • and Motion 


[chap, lviii 


in pail’s ; the members of each pair belonging to two different particles, 
and being opposite in direction, in the line joining the particles, and 
equal in magnitude” (p. 368). Here again, a purely logical point 
remains. The above statement appears unobjectionable, but it does 
not show that absolute motion is unnecessary. The axes cannot be 
material, for all matter is or may be subject to forces, and therefore 
unsuitable for our purpose ; they cannot even be defined by any fixed 
geometrical relation to matter. Thus our axes will really be spatial ; 
and if there were no absolute space, the suggested axes could not exist. 
For apart from absolute space, any axes would have to l)e material or 
nothing. The axes can, in a sense, lx? defined by relation to matter, but 
not by a constant geometrical relation ; and when we ask what property 
is changed by motion relative to such axes, the only possible answer is 
that the absolute position has changed. Thus absolute space and absolute 
motion are not avoided bv Mr Macaulay’s statement of Newton’s laws. 

468 . If absolute rotation alone were in question, it would be possible, 
by abandoning all that recommends the relational theory to philosophers 
and men of science, to keep its logical essence intact. What is aimed 
at is, to state the principles of Dynamics in terms of sensible entities. 
Among these we find the metrical properties of space, but not straight 
lines and planes. Collinearity and coplanarity may be included, but if 
a set of collinear material points change their straight line, there is no 
sensible intrinsic change. Hence all advocates of the relational theory, 
when they are thorough, endeavour, like Leibniz*, to deduce the straight 
line from distance. For this there is also the reason that the field of a 
given distance is all space, whereas the field of the generating relation 
of a straight line is only that straight line, whence the latter, but not 
the former, makes an intrinsic distinction among the points of space, 
which the relational theory seeks to avoid. Still, we might regard 
straight lines as relations between material points, and absolute rotation 
would then appear as change in a relation between material points, 
which is logically compatible with a relational theory of space. We 
should have to admit, however, that the straight line was not a sensible 
property of two particles between which it was a relation ; and in any 
case, the necessity for absolute translational accelerations remains fatal 
to any relational theory of motion. 

469 . Macht has a very curious argument by which he attempts to 
refute the grounds in favour of absolute rotation. He remarks that, in 
the actual world, the earth rotates relating to the fixed stars, and that 
the universe is not given twice over in different shapes, but only once, 
and as we find it. Hence any argument that the rotation of the earth 
could be inferred if there were no heavenly bodies is futile. This ar- 
gument contains the very essence of empiricism, in a sense in which 

* See my article Recent Work on Leibniz,” in Mind, 

t /He Meehan ik in three Eutirickelung, 1st edition, ]>. 21 f>. 



493 


407 - 469 ] Absolute mid Relative Motion 

empiricism is radically opposed to the philosophy advocated in the 
present work*. The logical basis of the argument is that all proposi- 
tions are essentially concerned with actual existents, not with entities 
which may or may not exist. For if, as has been held throughout our 
previous discussions, the whole dynamical world with its laws can be 
considered without regard to existence, then it can be no part of the 
meaning of these laws to assert that the matter to which they apply 
exists, and therefore they can be applied to universes which do not exist. 
Apart from general arguments, it is evident that the laws are so applied 
throughout rational Dynamics, and that, in all exact calculations, the 
distribution of matter which is assumed is not that of the actual world. 
It seems impossible to deny significance to such calculations ; and yet, 
if they have significance, if they contain propositions at all, whether true 
or false, then it can be no necessary part of their meaning to assert the 
existence of the matter to which they are applied. I his being so, the 
universe is given, as an entity, not only twice, but as many times as 
there are possible distributions of matter, and Mach’s argument falls to 
the ground. The point is important, as illustrating a respect in which 
the philosophy here advocated is to be reckoned with idealism and 
not with empiricism, in spite of the contention that what exists can 
only be known empirically. 

Thus, to conclude : Absolute motion is essential to Dynamics, and 
involves absolute space. This fact, which is a difficulty in current philo- 
sophies, is for us a powerful confirmation of the logic upon which our 
discussions have been based. 

* Cf. Art. "Nativism” in the Dictionary of P/ii/o*ophy and l**ycltohtgy , edited by 

Baldwin, Vol. n, IW3L 



CHAPTER LIX. 


i 

i 

HERTZ’S DYNAMICS. 

470 . Wk have seen that Newton s Laws are wholly lacking in self- 
evidence — so much so, indeed, that they contradict the law of causation 
in a form which has usually been held to be indubitable. We have seen 
also that these laws are specially suggestive of the law of gravitation. 
In order to eliminate what, in elementary Dynamics, is specially New- 
tonian, from what is really essential to the subject, we shall do well to 
examine some attempts to re-state the fundamental principles in a form 
more applicable to such sciences as Electricity. For this purpose the 
most suitable work seems to be that of Hertz*. 

The fundamental principles of Hertz’s theory are so simple and so 
admirable that it seems worth while to expound them briefly. His 
object, like that of most recent writers, is to construct a system in 
which there are only three fundamental concepts, space, time, and mass. 
The elimination of a fourth concept, such as force or energy, though 
evidently demanded by theory, is difficult to carry out mathematically. 
Hertz seems, however, to have overcome the difficulty in a satisfactory 
manner. There are, in his system, three stages in the specification of 
a motion. In the first stage, only the relations of space and time are 
considered: this stage is purely kinematical. Matter appeal's here merely 
as a means of establishing, through the motion of a particle, a one-one 
correlation between a series of points and a series of instants. At this 
stage a collection of n particles has $n coordinates, all so far independent: 
the motions which result when all are regarded as independent are all 
the thinkable motions of the system. But before coming to kinetics, 
Hertz introduces an intermediate stage. Without introducing time, 
there are in any free material system direct relations between space 
and mass, which form the geometrical connections of the system. 
(These may introduce time in the sense of involving velocities, but 
they are independent of time in the sense that they are expressed at 
all times by the same equations, and that these do not contain the time 
explicitly.) Those among thinkable motions which satisfy the equations 


* Principien der Mechanik , Leipzig, 1894. 



405 


470, 471] Hertzs Dynamics 

of connection are called /xmible motions. The connections among the 
parts of a system are assumed further to be continuous in a certain 
well-defined sense (p. 89). It then follows that they can be expressed 
by homogeneous linear differential equations of the first order among 
the coon! i nates. But now a further principle is needed to discriminate 
among possible motions, and here Hertz introduces his only law of 
motion, which is as follows : 

“ Every free system persists in its state of rest or of uniform motion 
in a straightest path.” 

This law' requires some explanation. In the first place, when there are 
in a system unequal particles, each is split into a number of particles 
proportional to its mass. By this means all particles become equal. 
If now r there are n particles, their Sii coordinates are regarded as the 
coordinates of a point in space of 3 n dimensions. The above law' then 
asserts that, in a free system, the velocity of this representative point is 
constant, and its path from a given point to another neighbouring point 
in a given direction is that one, among the possible paths through these 
two points, which has the smallest curvature. Such a path is called a 
natural path, and motion in it is called a natural motion. 

471. It will be seen that this system, though far simpler and more 
philosophical in form than Newton's, does not differ very greatly in 
regard to the problems discussed in the preceding chapter. We still 
have, what we found to be the essence of the law of inertia, the necessity 
for three configurations in order to obtain a causal relation. This broad 
fact must reappear in every system at all resembling ordinary Dynamics, 
and is exhibited in the necessity for differential equations of the second 
order, which pervades all Physics. But there is one very material dif- 
ference between Hertz's system and Newton's — a difference which, as 
Hertz points out, renders an experimental decision between the two 
at least theoretically possible. The special laws, other than the laws 
of motion, which regulate any particular system, are for Newton laws 
concerning mutual accelerations, such as gravitation itself. For Hertz, 
these special laws are all contained in the geometrical connections of 
the system, and are expressed in eq nations involving only velocities 
(v. p. 48). This is a considerable simplification, and is shown by Hertz 
to be more conformable to phenomena in all departments except where 
gravitation is concerned. It is also a great simplification to have only 
one law of motion, instead of New ton's three. But for the philosopher, 
so long as this law involves second differentials (which are introduced 
through the curvature), it is a comparatively minor matter that the 
special law s of special systems should be of the first older. 

The definition of mass as number of particles, it should be observed, 
is a mere mathematical device, and is not, I think, regarded by Hertz as 
anything more ( v . p. 54). Not only must we allow the possibility of 
incommensurable masses, but even if this difficulty were overcome, it 



496 Matter and Motion [chap, lix 

would still remain significant to assert that all our ultimate particles 
were equal. Mass would therefore still be a variety of magnitude, only 
that all particles would happen to be of the same magnitude as regards 
their mass. This would not effect any theoretical simplification, and we 
shall do well, therefore, to retain mass as an intensive quantity of w'hich 
a certain magnitude belongs to a certain particle, without any implica- 
tion that the particle is divisible. There is, in fact, no valid ground for 
denying ultimately different masses to different particles. The whole 
question is, indeed, purely empirical, and the philosopher should, in this 
matter, accept passively what the physicist finds requisite. 

With regard to ether and its relations to matter, a similar remark 
seems to be applicable. Ether is, of course, matter in the philosophical 
sense ; but beyond this the present state of Science will scarcely permit 
us to go. It should be observed, however, that in Electricity, as else- 
where, our equations are of the second order, thus indicating that the 
law of inertia, as interpreted in the preceding chapter, still holds good. 
This broad fact seems, indeed, to be the chief result, for philosophy, of 
our discussion of dynamical principles. 

472. Thus to sum up, we have two principal results : 

(1) In any independent system, there is a relation between the 
configurations at three given times, which is such that, given the con- 
figurations at two of the times, the configuration at the third time is 
determinate. 

(2) There is no independent system in the actual world except the 
whole material universe ; but if two universes which have the same causal 
laws as the actual universe differ only in regard to the matter at a great 
distance from a given region, the relative motions within this region will 
be approximately the same in the two universes — t.e. an upper limit can 
be found for the difference between the two sets of motions. 

These two principles apply equally to the Dynamics of Newton and 
to that of Hertz. When these are abandoned, other principles will give 
a science having but little resemblance to received Dynamics. 

473. One general principle, which is commonly stated as vital to 
Dynamics, deserves at least a passing mention. This is the principle 
that the cause and effect are equal. Owing to pre-occupation with 
quantity and ignorance of symbolic logic, it appears to have not been 
perceived that this statement is equivalent to the assertion that the 
implication between cause and effect is mutual. All equations, at bottom, 
are logical equations, i.e. mutual implications; quantitative equality 
between variables, such as cause and effect, involves a mutual formal 
implication. Thus the principle in question can only be maintained 
if cause and effect be placed on the same logical level, which, with the 
interpretation we were compelled to give to causality, it is no longer 
possible to do. Nevertheless, when one state of the universe is given, 
any two others have a mutual implication; and this is the source of 



471 - 474 ] Hertzs Dynamics 497 

the various laws of conservation which pervade Dynamics, and give the 
truth underlying the supposed equality of cause and effect. 

474 . We may now review the whole course of the arguments con- 
tained in the present work. In Part I, an attempt is made to analyze 
the nature of deduction, and of the logical concepts involved in it. Of 
these, the most puzzling is the notion of class, and from the contra- 
diction discussed in Chapter x (though this is perhaps soluble by the 
doctrine of types*), it appeared that a tenable theory as to the nature 
of classes is very hard to obtain. In subsequent Parts, it was shown 
that existing pure mathematics (including Geometry and Rational 
Dynamics) can be derived wholly from the indefinables and indemon- 
strables of Part I. In this process, two points are specially important : 
the definitions and the existence -theorems. A definition is always either 
the definition of a class, or the definition of the single member of a unit 
class: this is a necessary result of the plain fact that a definition can 
only be effected by assigning a property of the object or objects to 
be defined, i.e. by stating a propositional function which they are to 
satisfy. A kind of grammar controls definitions, making it impossible 
e.g. to define Euclidean Space , but possible to define the class of Euclidean 
spaces. And wherever the principle of abstraction is employed, i.e. where 
the object to be defined is obtained from a transitive symmetrical re- 
lation, some class of classes will always be the object required. When 
symbolic expressions are used, the requirements of what may be called 
grammar become evident, and it is seen that the logical type of the 
entity defined is in no way optional. 

The existence-theorems of mathematics — i.e. the proofs that the 
various classes defined are not null — are almost all obtained from 
Arithmetic. It may be well here to collect the more important of 
them. The existence of zero is derived from the fact that the null- 
class is a member of it ; the existence of 1 from the fact that zero is a 
unit-class (for the null-class is its only member). Hence, from the fact 
that, if n be a finite number, n + 1 is the number of numbers from 0 to n 
(both inclusive), the existence-theorem follows for all finite numbers. 
Hence, from the class of the finite cardinal numbers themselves, follows 
the existence of a 0 , the smallest of the infinite cardinal numbers ; and 
from the series of finite cardinals in order of magnitude follows the 
existence of <w, the smallest of infinite ordinals. From the definition 
of the rational numbers and of their order of magnitude follows the 
existence of rj , the type of endless compact denumerable series ; thence, 
from the segments of the series of rationals, the existence of the real 
numbers, and of 6 , the type of continuous series. The terms of the 
series of well-ordered types are proved to exist from the two facts : 
(1) that the number of well-ordered types from 0 to a is a + 1, (2) that 


* See Appendix B. 



498 


Matter and Motion 


[chap, lix 

if u be a class of well-ordered types having no maximum, the series of 
all types not greater than every n is itself of a type greater than every «. 
From the existence of 6 , by the definition of complex numbers (Chapter 
xliv), we prove the existence of the class of Euclidean spaces of any 
number of dimensions ; thence, by the process of Chapter xlvi, we prove 
the existence of the class of projective spaces, and thence, by removing 
the points outside a closed quadric, we prove the existence of the class 
of non-Euclidean descriptive (hyperbolic) spaces. By the methods of 
Chapter xi.vin, we prove the existence of spaces with various metrical 
properties. Lastly, by correlating some of the points of a space with 
all the terms of a continuous series in the ways explained in Chapter Lvi, 
we prove the existence of the class of dynamical worlds. Throughout 
this process, no entities are employed but such as are definable in terms 
of the fundamental logical constants. Thus the chain of definitions 
and existence- theorems is complete, and the purely logical nature of 
mathematics is established throughout. 



APPENDIXES 



LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS. 


Bb. Begriff aachrift. Eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelepraohe dee reinen 

Denkens. Halle a/S, 1879. 

Ql. Grundlagen der Arithmetik. Eine logisch-mathematische Untersuchung liber den 
Begriff der Zahl. Breslau, 1884. 

FT. Ueber forma le T heorien der Arithmetik. SitzungBberichte der JenaiBohen Gesell- 
aohaft fUr Medicin und Naturwissenscbaft, 1885. 

FuB. Function und Begriff. Vortrag gehalten in der Sitzung vom 9. Januar, 1891, der 
Jenaischen Gesellschaft fiir Medicin und Naturwissenschaffc. Jena, 1891. 

BuG. Ueber Begriff und Gegenatand. Vierfceljahrschrift fiir wiss. Phil., xvi 2 (1892). 

SuB. Ueber Sinn und Bedeutung. Zeitschrift fiir Phil, und phil. Kritik, vol. 100 (1892). 

KB. Kritische Beleuchtung einiger Punkte in E. Schroder' a V or lea ungen iiber die Algebra 
der Logik. Archiv fiir syst. Phil., Vol. i (1895). 

BP. Ueber die Begriff aachrift des Herm Beano und meine eigene. Bench te der math.- 
physischen CJasse der Konigl. Sachs. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften z u Leipzig 
(1896). 

Gg. Grundgeaetze der Arithmetik. Begriffaschriftlich abgeleitet. Vol. i. Jena, 1898. 
Vol. ii. 1903. 



APPENDIX A. 


THE LOGICAL AND ARITHMETICAL DOCTRINES OF FREGE. 

475. The work of Frege, which appears to be far less known than it 
deserves, contains many of the doctrines set forth in Parts I and II of the 
present work, and where it differs from the views which I have, advocated, 
the differences demand discussion. Frege’s work abounds in subtle distinc- 
tions, and avoids all the usual fallacies which beset writers on Logic. His 
symbolism, though unfortunately so cumbrous as to be very difficult to 
employ in practice, is based upon an analysis of logical notions much more 
profound than Peano’s, and is philosophically very superior to its more 
convenient rival. In what follows, I shall try briefly to expound Frege’s 
theories on the most important points, and to explain my grounds for 
differing where I do differ. Rut the points of disagreement are very few 
and slight compared to those of agreement. They all result from difference 
on three points: (1) Frege does not think that there is a contradiction in the 
notion of concepts which cannot be made logical subjects (see $ 49 supra ) ; 

(2) he thinks that, if a term a occurs in a proposition, the proposition can 
always be analysed into a and an assertion about a (see Chapter vn); 

(3) he is not aware of the contradiction discussed in Chapter x. These are 
very fundamental matters, and it will lie well here to discuss them afresh, 
since the previous discussion was written in almost complete ignorance of 
Frege’s work. 

Frege is compelled, as I have been, to employ common words in technical 
senses which depart more or less from usage. As his departures are frequently 
different from mine, a difficulty arises as regards the translation of his terms. 
Some of these, to avoid confusion, I shall leave untranslated, since every 
English equivalent that I can think of has been already employed by me in a 
slightly different sense. 

The principal heads under which Frege’s doctrines may be discussed are 
the following: (1) meaning and indication; (2) truth-values and judgment ; 
(3) Begriff and Gegenstand; (4) classes; (5) implication and symbolic logic; 
(6) the definition of integers and the principle of abstraction; (7) mathe- 
matical induction and the theory of progressions. I shall deal successively 
with these topics. 



602 


Appendix A [ 476 - 

476 . Meaning and indication. The distinction between meaning (Sinn) 

and indication ( Bedeutung )* is roughly, though not exactly, equivalent to 
my distinction between a concept as such and what the concept denotes 
(§96). Frege did not possess this distinction in the first two of the works 
under consideration (the Begriffsschrift and the Gmndlagen der Arithmetik) ; 
it appears first in BuG. (cf. p. 198), and is specially dealt with in SuB. 
Before making the distinction, he thought that identity has to do with the 
names of objects (Bs. p. 13) : “ A is identical with B” means, he says, that 
the sign A and the sign B have the same signification (Bs. p. 15) — a definition 
which, verbally at least, suffers from circularity. But later he expljains 
identity in much the same way as it was explained in § 64. “ Identity,” he 

says, “ calls for reflection owing to questions which attach to it and are not 
quite easy to answer. Is it a relation ? A relation between Gegenstande ? 
or between names or signs of Gegenstiinde ?” (SuB. p. 25). We must 
distinguish, he says, the meaning, in which is contained . the way of being 
given, from what is indicated (from the Bedeutung). Thus “the evening star” 
and “the morning star” have the same indication, but not the same meaning. 
A word ordinarily stands for its indication; if we wish to speak of its 
meaning, we must use inverted commas or some such device (pp. 27-8). The 
indication of a proper name is the object which it indicates ; the presentation 
which goes with it is quite subjective; between the two lies the meaning, 
which is not subjective and yet is not the object (p. 30). A proper name 
expresses its meaning, and indicates its indication (p. 3 1 ). 

This theory of indication is more sweeping and general than mine, as 
appears from the fact that every proper name is supposed to have the two 
sides. It seems to me that only such proper names as are derived from con- 
cepts by means of the can be said to have meaning, and that such words as 
John merely indicate without meaning. If one allows, as I do, that concepts 
can be objects and have proper names, it seems fairly evident that their 
proper names, as a rule, will indicate them without having any distinct 
meaning ; but the opposite view, though it leads to an endless regress, does 
not appear to be logically impossible. The further discussion of this point 
must be postponed until we come to Frege’s theory of Begrifle. 

477 . Truth-values and Judgment. The problem to be discussed under 
this head is the same as the one raised in § 52 1, concerning the difference 
between asserted and unasserted propositions. But Frege’s position on this 
question is more subtle than mine, and involves a more radical analysis of 
judgment. His Begriffsschrift y owing to the absence of the distinction 
between meaning and indication, has a simpler theory than his later works. 
I shall therefore omit it from the discussions. 

There are, we are told (Gg. p. x), three elements in judgment: (l) the 
recognition of truth, (2) the Gedanke, (3) the truth-value ( Wahrheitswerth). 

* I do not translate Ilvdeutung by denotation, because this word has a technical 
meaning different from Frege's, and also because bedeuten , for him, is uot quite the same 
as denoting for me. 

t This is the logical side of the problem of Annahmen , raised by Meinong in his able 
work on the subject, Leipzig, 1902. The logical, though not the psychological, part of 
Meinong’s work appears to have been completely anticipated by Frege. 



478] The Logical and Arithmetical Doctrines of Frege 508 

Here the Ged&nke is what I have called an unasserted proposition — or rather, 
what I called by this n^me covers both the Gedanke alone and the Ged&nke 
together with its truth- value. It will be well to have names for these two 
distinct notions ; I shall call the Ged&nke alone a propositional concept ; the 
truth-value of a Gedanke I shall call an assumption • Formally at least, an 
assumption does not require that its content should be a propositional 
concept: whatever x may be, “the truth of x” is a definite notion. Thia 
means the true if x is true, and if x is false or not a proposition it means the 
false (FuB. p. 21). In like manner, according to Frege, there is “the 
falsehood of x”; these are not assertions and negations of propositions, but 
only assertions of truth or of falsity, i.e. negation belongs to what is asserted, 
and is not the opposite of assertion!. Thus we have first a propositional 
concept, next its truth or falsity as the case may be, and finally the assertion 
of its truth or falsity. Thus in a hypothetical judgment, we have a relation, 
not of two judgments, but of two propositional concepts (SuB. p. 43). 

This theory is connected in a very curious way with ther theory of 
meaning and indication. It is held that every assumption indicates the 
true or the false (which are called truth-values), while it means the 
corresponding propositional concept. The assumption “2* ----4” indicates 
the true, we are told, just as “2 2 ” indicates (FuB. p. 13; SuB. p. 32). 
In a dependent clause, or where a name occurs (such as Odysseus) which 
indicates nothing, a sentence may have no indication. But when a sentence 
has a truth-value, this is its indication. Thus every assertive sentence 
( Behauptungssatz ) is a proper name, which indicates the true or the false 
(SuB. pp. 32 — 4; Gg. p. 7). The sign of judgment ( Urtheilstrich ) does 
not combine with other signs to denote an object ; a judgment indicates 
nothing, but asserts something. Frege has a special symbol for judgment, 
which is something distinct from and additional to the truth-value of a 
propositional concept (Gg. pp. 9—10). 

478. There are some difficulties in the above theory which it will be 
well to discuss. In the first place, it seems doubtful whether the introduction 
of truth- values marks any real analysis. If we consider, say, “ Caesar died,” 
it would seem that what is asserted is the propositional concept “ the death 
of Caesar,” not “ the truth of the death of Caesar.” This latter seems to be 
merely another propositional concept, asserted in “ the death of Caesar is 
true,” which is not, 1 think, the same proposition as “ Caesar died.” There 
is great difficulty in avoiding psychological elements here, and it would 
seem that Frege has allowed them to intrude in describing judgment as 
the recognition of truth (Gg. p. x). The difficulty is due to the fact that 
there is a psychological sense of assertion, which is what is lacking to 
Meinong’s Annahmen , and that this does not run parallel with the logical 
sense. Psychologically, any proposition, whether true or false, may be 
merely thought of, or may l>e actually asserted : but for this possibility, 
error would be impossible. But logically, true propositions only are asserted, 

* Frege, like Meinong, calls this an Annahme : FuB. p. 21. 

f Gg. p. 10. Cf. also Bs. p. 4. 

X When a term which indicates is itself to be spoken of, as opposed to what it indicates, 
Frege uses inverted commas. Cf. § 56. 



504 Appendix A [ 478 - 

though they may occur in an unasserted form as parts of other propositions. 
In “ p implies q” either or both of the propositions p , q may be true, yet 
each, in this proposition, is unassorted in a logical, and not merely in a 
psychological, sense. Thus assertion has a definite place among logical 
notions, though there is a psychological notion of assertion to which nothing 
logical corresponds. But assertion does not seem to be a constituent of 
an asserted proposition, although it is, in some sense, contained in an 
asserted proposition. Jf p is a proposition, “p’s truth” is a concept which 
has being even if p is false, and thus “p’ s truth” is not the same as p 
asserted. Thus no concept can be found which is equivalent to p assertfed, 
and therefore assertion is not a constituent in p asserted. Yet assertion 
is not a term to which p y when asserted, has an external relation ; for atiy 
such relation would need to be itself asserted in order to yield what we 
want. Also a difficulty arises owing to the apparent fact, which may 
however be doubted, that an asserted proposition can never be part of 
another proposition : thus, if this be a fact, where any statement is made 
about p asserted, it is not really about p asserted, but only about the 
assertion of p. This difficulty becomes serious in the case of Frege's one 
and only principle of inference (Bs. p. 9) : “ p is true and p implies q ; 
therefore q is true*.” Here it is quite essential that there should be three 
actual assertions, otherwise the assertion of propositions deduced from 
asserted premisses would be impossible; yet the three assertions together 
form one proposition, whose unity is shown by the word theref<yre y without 
which q would not have been deduced, but would have been asserted as a 
fresh premiss. 

It is also almost impossible, at least to me, to divorce assertion from 
truth, as Frege does. An asserted proposition, it would seem, must be 
the same as a true proposition. We may allow that negation belongs to 
the content of a proposition (Bs. p. 4), and regard every assertion as 
asserting something to be true. We shall then correlate p and not -p as 
unasserted propositions, and regard “pis false” as meaning “not-p is true.” 
But to divorce assertion from truth seems only possible by taking assertion 
in a psychological sense. 

479. Frege’s theory that asvsumptions are proper names for the true 
or the false, as the case may be, appears to me also untenable. Direct 
inspection seems to show that the relation of a proposition to the true 
or the false is quite different from that of (say), “the present King of 
England” to Edward VII. Moreover, if Frege’s view were correct on this 
point, we should have to hold that in an asserted proposition it is the 
meaning, not the indication, that is asserted, for otherwise, all asserted 
propositions would assert the very same thing, namely the true, (for false 
propositions are not asserted). Thus asserted propositions would not differ 
from one another in any way, but would be all strictly and simply identical. 
Asserted propositions have no indication (FuB. p. 21), and can only differ, 
if at all, in some way analogous to meaning. Thus the meaning of the 
unasserted proposition together with its truth-value must lie what is asserted, 


Cf. mpra , g IB, (4) and § 88. 



480 ] The Logical and Arithmetical Doctrines of Frege 605 

if the meaning simply is rejected. But there seems no purpose in introduc- 
ing the truth- value here : it seems quite sufficient to say that an asserted 
proposition is one whose meaning is true, and that to say the meaning is 
true is the same as to say the meaning is asserted. We might then conclude 
that true propositions, even when they occur as parts of others, ate always 
and essentially asserted, while false propositions are always unasserted, thus 
escaping the difficulty about therefore discussed above. It may also be objected 
to Frege that “ the true ” and “ the false,” as opposed to truth and falsehood, 
do not denote single definite things, but rather the classes of true and false 
propositions respectively. This objection, however, would be met by his 
theory of ranges, which correspond approximately to my classes ; these, 
he says, are things, and the true and the false are ranges (i>. inf). 

480 . Beyriff and Gegen stand. Functions. 1 como now to a point in 
which Frege’s work is very important, and requires careful examination. 
His use of the word Beyriff does not correspond exactly to any notion in 
my vocabulary, though it comes very near to the notion of an assertion as 
defined in §43, and discussed in Chapter vn. On the other hand, his 
Gegenstand seems to correspond exactly to what I have called a thing (jj i8). 

I shall therefore translate Gegenstand by thing. The meaning of proper 
name seems to be the same for him as for me, but he regards the range of 
proper names as confined to things, because they alone, in his opinion, can 
be logical subjects. 

Frege’s theory of functions and Beyriff r is set forth simply in FuB. and 
defended against the criticisms of Kerry* in BuG. He regards functions 
and in this 1 agree with him — as more fundamental than predicates and 
relations; but he adopts concerning functions the theory of subject and 
assertion winch we discussed and rejected in ( chapter vn. The acceptance of 
this view gives a simplicity to his exposition which I have been unable to 
attain, but T do not find anything in his work to persuade* me of the 
legitimacy of his analysis. 

An arithmetical function, e.g. 2F .r, does not denote, Prege says, the 
result of an arithmetical operation, for that is merely a number, which would 
be nothing new (FuB. p fi). The essence of a function is what is left when 
the :r is taken away, i.e. f in the above instance, 2 ( ) 3 + ( ). The argument 
x does not belong to the function, but the two together make a whole 
(ib. p. 6). A function may be a proposition for every value of the variable; 
its value is then always a truth-value (p. 13). A proposition may be divided 
into two parts, as “Caesar” and “conquered Gaul.” The former Frege calls 
the argument , the latter the function. Any thing whatever is a possible 
argument for a function (p 17). (This division of propositions corresponds 
exactly to my subject and assertion as explained in § 43, but Frege does not 
restrict this method of analysis as I do in Chapter vn.) A thing is anything 
which is not a function, i.e. whose expression leaves no empty place. The 
two following accounts of the nature of a function are quoted from the 
earliest and one of the latest of Frege’s works respectively. 

(1) “If in an expression, whose content need not be propositional 


Vierteljahrschrift fur wiss. Phil., vol. xi, pp. 249-307. 



606 Appendix A [ 480 , 

(i beurtheilbar ), a simple or composite sign occurs in one or more places, and 
we regard it as replaceable, in one or more of these places, by something else, 
but by the same everywhere, then we call the part of the expression which 
remains invariable in this process a function, and the replaceable part we 
call its argument’ 1 (Bs. p. 16). 

(2) “ If from a proper name we exclude a proper name, which is part 
or the whole of the first, in some or all of the places where it occurs, but in 
such a way that these places remain recognizable as to be filled by one and 
the same arbitrary proper name (as argument positions of the first kind), 
I call what we thereby obtain the name of a function of the first order with 
one argument. Such a name, together with a proper name which fills the 
argument-places, forms a proper name ” (Gg. p. 44). 

The latter definition may become plainer by the help of some examples. 
“ The present king of England ” is, according to Frege, a proper name, and 
“England is a proper name which is part of it. Thus here we may regard 
England as the argument, and “ the present king of ” as function. Thus we 
are led to “the present king of x. ” This expression will always have a 
meaning, but it will not have an indication except for those values of x 
which at present are monarchies. The above function is not propositional. 
But “Caesar conquered Gaul ” leads to “ x conquered Gaul ” ; here we have a 
propositional function. There is here a minor point to be noticed: the asserted 
proposition is not a proper name, but only the assumption is a proper name 
for the true or the false (v. supra) ; thus it is not “ Caesar conquered Gaul ” 
as asserted, but only the corresponding assumption, that is involved in the 
genesis of a propositional function. This is indeed sufficiently obvious, since 
we wish x to be able to be any thing in “ x conquered Gaul," whereas there 
is no such asserted proposition except when x did actually perform this feat. 
Again consider “Socrates is a man implies Socrates is a mortal.” This 
(unasserted) is, according to Frege, a proper name for the true. By varying 
the proper name “ Sociutes, ’ we can obtain three propositional functions, 
namely “x is a man implies Socrates is a mortal," “Socrates is a man implies 
x is a mortal,” “a: is a man implies a; is a mortal.” Of these the first and 
third are true for all values of x, the second is true when and only when x is 
a mortal. 

By suppressing in like manner a proper name in the name of a function 
of the first order with one argument, we obtain the name of a function of the 
first order with two arguments (Gg. p. 44). Thus e.y. starting from “ 1 < 2,” 
we get first “ * < 2,” which is the name of a function of the first order with 
one argument, and thence il x<y ,” which is the name of a function of the 
first order with two arguments. By suppressing a function in like manner, 
Frege says, we obtain the name of a function of the second order (Gg. p. 44). 
TIiub e.y. the assertion of existence in the mathematical sense is a function 
of the second order : “ There is at least one value of x satisfying ” is not a 
function of x, but may be regarded as a function of Here ^ must on no 
account be a thing, but may be any function. Thus this proposition, 
considered as a function of <£, is quite different from functions of the first 
order, by the fact that the possible arguments are different. Thus given any 
proposition, say f(a) t we may consider either f(x), the function of the first 



481 ] The Logical and Arithmetical Doctrines of Frege 607 

order resulting from varying a and keeping f constant, or ^ (a), the function 
of the second order got by varying f and keeping a fixed ; \>r, finally, we may 
consider <f>(x ), in which both f and a are separately varied. (It is to be 
observed that such notions as 0 (a), in which we consider any proposition 
concerning a, are involved in the identity of indiscernibles as stated in § 43.) 
Functions of the first order with two variables, Frege points out, express 
relations (Bs. p. 17) ; the referent and the relatum are both subjects in a 
relational proposition (Gl. p. 82). Relations, just as much as predicates, 
belong, Frege rightly says, to pure logic (ib. p. 83). 

481 . The word Begriff is used by Frege to mean nearly the same thing 
as propositional f unction ( e.g . FuB. p. 28)*; when there are two variables, 
the Begriff is a relation. A thing is anything not a function, i.e. anything 
whose expression leaves no empty plage (ib. p. 18). To Frege’s theory of the 
essential cleavage between things and Begriffe, Kerry objects (loc. cit. p. 272 fF.) 
that Begriffe also can occur as subjects. To this Frege makes two replies. 
In the first place, it is, he says, an important distinction that some terms can 
only occur as subjects, while others can occur also as concepts, even if Begriffe 
can also occur as subjects (BuG. p. 195). In this I agree with him entirely ; 
the distinction is the one employed in §§ 48, 49. But he goes on to a second 
point which appears to me mistaken. We can, he says, have a concept 
falling under a higher one (as Socrates falls under man, he means, not as 
Greek falls under man); but in such cases, it is not the concept itself, but its 
name, that is in question (BuG. p. 195). “The concept horse,” he says, is 
not a concept, but a thing ; the peculiar use is indicated by inverted commas 
(ib. p. 196). But a few pages later he makes statements which seem to 
involve a different view. A concept, he says, is essentially predicative even 
when something is asserted of it : an assertion which can be made of a 
concept does not fit an object. When a thing iH said to fall under a concept, 
and when a concept is said to fall under a higher concept, the two relations 
involved, though similar, are not the same (ib. p. 201). It is difficult to me 
to reconcile these remarks with those of p. 195; but I shall return to this 
point shortly. 

Frege recognizes the unity of a proposition : of the parts of a propositional 
concept, he says, not all can be complete, but one at least must be incomplete 
(ungemttiyt) or predicative, otherwise the parts would not cohere (ib. p. 205). 
He recognizes also, though he does not discuss, the oddities resulting from 
any and every and such words : thus he remarks that every positive integer 
is the sum of four squares, but “every positive integer” is not a possible 
value of x in ik x is the sum of four squares” The meaning of “every 
positive integer,” he says, depends upon the context (Bs. p. 17) — a remark 
which is doubtless correct, but does not exhaust the subject. Self-contra- 
dictory notions are admitted as concepts : F is a concept if “ a falls under 
the concept F” is a proposition whatever thing a may lie (Gl. p. 87). A 
concept is the indication of a predicate ; a thing is what can never be 


* “We have here a function whose value is always a truth- value. Such functions 
with one urgument we have called Begriffe ; with two, we call them relations." Cf. Gl. 

pp. 82 - 8 . 



508 Appendix A [ 481 , 

the whole indication of a predicate, though it may be that of a subject 
(BuG. p. 198). * 

482 . The al>ove theory, in spite of close resemblance, differs in some 
important points from the theory set forth in Part I above. Before 
examining the differences, I shall briefly recapitulate my own theory. 

Given any propositional concept, or any unity (see § 136), which may 
in the limit lie simple, its constituents are in general of two sorts : (1) those 
which may be replaced by anything else whatever without destroying the 
unity of the whole; (2) those which have not this property. Thus in “the 
death of Caesar,” anything else may be substituted for Caesar, but a proper 
name must not be substituted for death , and hardly anything can be 
substituted for of. Of the unity in question, the former class of constituents 
will be called term*, the latter concept*. We have then, in regard to any 
unity, to consider the following objects : 

(1) What remains of the said unity when one of its terms is simply 
removed, or, if the term occurs several times, when it is removed from 
one or more of the places in which it occurs, or, if the unity has more than 
one term, when two or more of its terms are removed from some or all of the 
places where they occur. This is what Frege calls a function. 

(2) The class of unities differing from the said unity, if at all, only by 
the fact that one of its terms has been replaced, in one or more of the places 
where it occurs, by some other terms, or by the fact that two or more of its 
terms have been thus replaced by other terms. 

(3) Any member of the class (2). 

(4) The assertion that every meml>er of the class (2) is true. 

(ft) The assertion that some member of the class (2) is true. 

(6) The relation of a member of the class (2) to the value which the 
variable has in that meml>er. 

The fundamental case is that where our unity is a propositional concept. 
From this is derived the usual mathematical notion of function, which might 
at first sight seem simpler. If f{x) is not a propositional function, its value 
for a given value of x (/(, r) being assumed to be one-valued) is the term y 
satisfying the propositional function y i.e. satisfying, for the given 

value of sr, some relational proposition ; this relational proposition is involved 
in the definition of /(:, r), and some such propositional function is required 
in the definition of any function which is not propositional. 

As regards (1), confining ourselves to one variable, it was maintained 
in Chapter vu that, except where the proposition from which we start 
is predicative or else asserts a fixed relation to a fixed term, there is no 
such entity : the analysis into argument and assertion cannot be performed 
in the manner required. Thus what Frege calls a function, if our conclusion 
was sound, is in general a non entity. Another point of difference from 
Frege, in which, however, he appears to be in the right, lies in the fact 
that 1 place no restriction upon the variation of the variable, whereas 
Frege, according to the nature of the function, confines the variable to 
things, functions of the first order with one variable, functions of the first 
order with two variables, functions of the second order with one variable, 
and so on. There are thus for him an infinite number of different kinds 



482 ] The Logical and Arithmetical Doctrines of Frege 509 

of variability. This arises from the fact that he regards as distinct the 
concept occurring as such and the concept occurring as term, which I (S 49) 
have identified. For me, the functions, which cannot be values of variables 
in functions of the first order, are non entities and false abstractions. 
Instead of the rump of a proposition considered in (1), 1 substitute (2) 
or (3) or (4) according to circumstances. The ground for regarding the w 
analysis into argument and function as not always possible is that, when 
one term is removed from a propositional concept, the remainder is apt 
to have no sort of unity, but to fall apart into a set of disjointed terms. 
Thus what is fundamental in such a case is (2). Frege's general definition 
of a function, which is intended to cover also functions which are not 
propositional, may be shown to be inadequate by considering what may 
be called the identical function, i.e. a; as a function of a-. If we follow 
Frege’s advice, and remove x in hopes of having the function left, we find 
that nothing is left at all ; yet nothing is not the meaning of the identical 
function. Frege wishes to have the empty places where the argument is 
to be inserted indicated in some way ; thus he says that in 2j* + x the 
function is 2( ) 3 + ( ). But here his requirement that the two empty 
places are to be tilled by the same letter cannot be indicated : there is no 
way of distinguishing what we mean from the function involved in 2.C 8 + y. 
The fact seems to be that we want the notion of any term of a certain 
class, and that this is what our empty places really stand for. The function, 
as a single entity, is the relation (6) above ; we can then consider any 
relatum of this relation, or the assertion of all or some of the relata, and 
any relation can be expressed in terms of the corresponding referent, as 
“ Socrates is a man ” is expressed in terms of Socrates. But the usual 
formal apparatus of the calculus of relations cannot be employed, because 
it presupposes propositional functions. We may say that a propositional 
function is a many-one relation which has all terms for the class of its 
referents, and has its relata contained among propositions* : or, if we 
prefer, w T e may call the class of relata of such a relation a propositional 
function. But the air of formal definition about these statements is 
fallacious, since propositional functions are presupposed in defining the 
class of referents and relata of a relation. 

Thus by means of propositional functions, propositions are collected into 
classes. (These classes are not mutually exclusive.) But we may also collect 
them into classes by the terms which occur in them : all propositions con- 
taining a given term a will form a class. In this way we obtain propositions 
concerning variable propositional functions. In the notation <f> (a?), the <f> is 
essentially variable ; if we wish it not to be so, we must take some particular 
proposition about a:, such as “ x is a class” or “a: implies x.” Thus <f>(x) 
essentially contains two variables. But, if we have decided that <f> is not a 
separable entity, we cannot regard itself as the second variable. It will 
be necessary to take as our variable either the relation of x to <j> (a;), or else 
the class of propositions (y) for different values of y but for constant <f>. 
This does not matter formally, bub it is important for logic to be clear as to 

* Not all relations having thU property are propositional functions ; v. in /. 



510 Appendix A [ 482 - 

the meaning of what appears as the variation of We obtain in this way 
another division of propositions into classes, but again these classes are not 
mutually exclusive. 

In the above manner, it would seem, we can make use of propositional 
functions without having to introduce the objects which Frege calls functions. 

It is to be observed, however, that the kind of relation by which proposi- 
tional functions are defined is less general than the class of many-one relations 
having their domain coextensive with terms and their converse domain con- 
tained in propositions. For in this way any proposition would, for a suitable 
relation, be relatum to any term, whereas the term which is referent must, 
for a propositional function, be a constituent of the proposition which is its 
relatum*. This point illustrates again that the class of relations involved 
is fundamental and incapable of definition. But it would seem also to show 
that Frege’s different kinds of variability are unavoidable, for in considering 
(say) <£(2), where <f> is variable, the variable would have to have as its range 
the above class of relations, which we may call propositional relations. 
Otherwise, <j>( 2) is not a proposition, and is indeed meaningless, for we 
are dealing with an indefinable, which demands that <#>(2) should be the 
relatum of 2 with regal’d to some propositional relation. The contradiction 
discussed in Chapter x seems to show that some mystery lurks in the varia- 
tion of propositional functions ; but for the present, Frege’s theory of different 
kinds of variables must, I think, be accepted. 

483. It remains to discus afresh the question whether concepts can be 
made into logical subjects without change of meaning. Frege’s theory, that 
when this appears to be done it is really the name of the concept that is 
involved, will not, I think, bear investigation. In the first place, the mere 
assertion “not the concept, but its name, is involved,” has already made the 
concept a subject. In the second place, it seems always legitimate to ask : 
“what is it that is named by this name?” If there were no answer, the 
name could not be a name ; but if there is an answer, the concept, as opposed 
to its name, can lie made a subject. (Frege, it may be observed, does not 
seem to have clearly disentangled the logical and linguistic elements of 
naming : the former depend upon denoting, and have, I think, a much more 
restricted range than Frege allows them.) It is true that we found difficulties 
in the doctrine that everything can be a logical subject : as regards “any a,” 
for example, and also as regards plurals. But in the case of “ any a,” there 
is ambiguity, which introduces a new class of problems; and as regards 
plurals, there are propositions in which the many behave like a logical 
subject in every respect except that they are many subjects and not one 
only (see §§ 127, 128). In the case of concepts, however, no such escapes 
are possible. The case of asserted propositions is difficult, but is met, I think, 
by holding that an asserted proposition is merely a true proposition, and is 
therefore asserted wherever it occurs, even when grammar would lead to 
the opposite conclusion. Thus, on the whole, the doctrine of concepts which 
cannot be made subjects seems untenable. 

484. Glasses. Frege’s theory of classes is very difficult, and I am not 

* The notion of a constituent of a proposition appears to be a logical indefinable. 



484 ] The Logical and Arithmetical Doctrines of Frege 511 

sure that I have thoroughly understood it. He gives the name Werthver - 
lauf* to an entity which appears to be nearly the same as what I call the 
class as one. The concept of the class, and the class as many, do not appear 
in his exposition. He differs from the theory set forth in Chapter vi chiefly 
by the fact that he adopts a more intensional view of classes than I have 
done, being led thereto mainly by the desirability of admitting the null class 
and of distinguishing a term from a class whose only member it is. I agree 
entirely that these two objects cannot be attained by an extensional theory, 
though I have tried to show how to satisfy the requirements of formalism 

OS 69, 73). 

The extension of a Beyriff, Frege says, is the range of a function whose 
value for every argument is a truth-value (FuB. p. 16). Ranges are things, 
whereas functions are not ( ib . p. 19). There would be no null-class, if classes 
were taken in extension; for the null-class is only possible if a class is not 
a collection of terms (KB. pp. 436-7). If a: be a term, we cannot identify 
.r, as the extensional view requires, with the class whose only meml)er is x ; 
for suppose a: to be a class having more than one member, and let y, z be 
two different members of x ; then if x is identical with the class whose only 
member is x, y and z will both be members of this clasB, and will therefore 
be identical with x arid with each other, contrary to the hypothesis f. The 
extension of a Begriff\\n& its being in the Begriff itself, not in the individuals 
falling under the Beyriff (ib. p. 451). When I say something about all men, 

I say nothing about some wretch in the centre of Africa, who is in no way 
indicated, and does not belong to the indication of man (p. 454). Beyriffe 
are prior to their extension, and it is a mistake to attempt, as Schroder doeB, 
to base extension on individuals ; this leads to the calculus of regions 
(Gebiete), not to Logic (p. 455). 

What Frege understands by a range, and in what way it is to be 
conceived without reference to objects, he endeavours to explain in his 
Grundgesetze der Arithmetik. He begins by deciding that two propositional 
functions are to have the same range when they have the same value for 
every value of x , i.e. for every value of x both are true or both false 
(pp. 7, 14) This is laid down as a primitive proposition. But this only 
determines the equality of ranges, not what they are in themselves. If 
X (() be a function which never has the same value for different values of ( 
and if we denote by # the range of we shall have X (<£') = X ) when 
and only when and \j/' are equal, i.e. when and only when <t>x and \f/x always 
have the same value. Thus the conditions for the equality of ranges do not 
of themselves decide what ranges are to be (p. 16). Let us decide arbitrarily 
— since the notion of a range is not yet fixed— that the true is to be the 
range of the function il x is true ” (as an assumption, not an asserted propo- 
sition), and the false is to be the range of the function = not every term 
is identical with itself.” It follows that the range of <t>x is the true when 
and only when the true and nothing else falls under the Beyriff the 
range of <^x is the false when and only when the false and nothing else falls 
under the Begriff <£x; in other cases, the range is neither the true nor 


I shall translate this as range. 


f Ib. p. 444. Cf. supra, § 74. 



512 


484, 


Appendix A 

the false (pp. 17 — 18). If only one thing falls under a concept, this one 
thing is distinct from the range of the concept in question (p. 18, note) — 
the reason is the same as that mentioned above. 

There is an argument (p. 49) to prove that the name of the range of a 
function always has an indication, i.e. that the symbol employed for it is 
never meaningless. In view of the contradiction discussed in Chapter x, 
I should be inclined to deny a meaning to a range when we have a proposi- 
tion of the form <£[./(<£) ], where f is constant and variable, or of the form 
f r ( x), where x is variable and f x is a propositional function which is de- 
terminate when x is given, but varies from one value of x to another — 
provided, when f x is analyzed into things and concepts, the part dependent 
on x does not consist only of things, but contains also at least one concept. 
This is a very complicated case, in which, J should say, there is no class 
as one, my only reason for saying so being that we can thus escape the 
contradiction. 

485 . By means of variable propositional functions, Frege obtains a 
definition of the relation which Peano calls €, namely the relation of a term 
to a class of which it is a member*. The definition is as follows: “den” 

is to mean the term (or the range of terms if there be none or many) x such 

that there is a propositional function <f> which is such that u is the range of 
<f> and <l>a is identical with x (p. 53). It is observed that this defines mu 

whatever things a and n may be. In the first place, suppose u to be a range. 

Then there is at least one </> whose range is u , and any two whose range is u 
are regarded by Frege as identical. Thus we may speak of the function 
whose range is u. In this case, mu is the proposition <f>a , which is true 
when a is a member of u , and is false otherwise. If, in the second place, 
u is not a range, then there is no such propositional function as <£, and 
therefore mu is the range of a propositional function which is always false, 
i.e. the null-range. Thus aai indicates the true when u is a range and a 
is a member of a ; mu indicates the false when u is a range and a is not a 
member of n ; in other cases, mu indicates the null-range. 

It is to be observed that from the equivalence of xtu and X£V for all 
values of x we can only infer the identity of n and v when u and v are 
ranges. When they are not ranges, the equivalence will always hold, since 
xtu and xtv are the null-range for all values of x ; thus if we allowed the 
inference in this case, any two objects which are not ranges would be 
identical, which is absurd. One might be tempted to doubt whether u and v 
must be identical even when they are ranges : with an intensional view of 
classes, this becomes open to question. 

Frege proceeds (p. 55) to an analogous definition of the propositional 
function of three variables which 1 have symbolised as x R y, and here again 
he gives a definition which does not place any restrictions on the variability 
of R. This is done by introducing a double range y defined by a propositional 
function of two variables; we may regard this as a class of couples with 
sense f. If then R is such a class of couples, and if (x ; y) is a member of this 

* Cf. §§ 21, 76, supra. 

+ Neglecting, for the present, our doubts as to there being any such entity as a couple 
with sense, cf. § 98. 



487] The Logical and Arithmetical Doctrines of Frege 513 

class, x R y is to hold ; in other cases it is to be false or null as before. On 
this basis, Frege successfully erects as much of the logic of relations as is 
required for his Arithmetic ; and he is free from the restrictions on the 
variability of R which arise from the intensional view of relations adopted in 
the present work (cf. § 83). 

486 . The chief difficulty which arises in the above theory of classes is as 
to the kind of entity that a range is to be. The reason which led me, against 
my inclination, to adopt an extensional view of classes, was the necessity of 
discovering some entity determinate for a given propositional function, and 
the same for any equivalent propositional function. Thus li .c is a man” is 
equivalent (we will suppose) to “x is a featherless biped,” and we wish to 
discover some one entity which is determined in the same way by both these 
propositional functions. The only single entity T have been able to discover 
is the class as one — except the derivative class (also as one) of propositional 
functions equivalent to either of the given propositional functions. This 
latter class is plainly a more complex notion, which will not enable us to 
dispense with the general notion of class; out this more complex notion 
(so we agreed in § 73) must be substituted for the class of terms in the 
symbolic treatment, if there is to l>e any null-class and if the class whose only 
member is a given term is to be distinguished from that term. It would 
certainly be a very great simplification to admit, as Frege does, a range 
which is something other than the whole composed of the terms satisfying 
the propositional function in question ; but for my part, inspection reveals to 
me no such entity. On this ground, and also on account of the contradiction, 
I feel compelled to adhere to the extensional theory of classes, though not 
quite as set forth in Chapter vi. 

487 . That some modification in that doctrine is necessary, is proved by 
the argument of KB. p. 444. This argument appears capable of proving 
that a class, even as one, cannot be identified with the class of which it is the 
only member. In § 74, I contended that the argument was met by the 
distinction between the class as one and the class as many, but this contention 
now appears to me mistaken. For this reason, it is necessary to re examine 
the whole doctrine of classes. 

Frege’s argument is as follows. If a is a class of more than one term, 
and if a is identical with the class whose only term is a, then to be a term 
of a is the same thing as to be a term of the class whose only term is a, 
whence a is the only term of a. This argument appears to prove not merely 
that. the extensional view of classes is inadequate, but rather that it is wholly 
inadmissible. For suppose a to be a collection, and suppose that a collection 
of one term is identical with that one term. Then, if a can be regarded as 
one collection, the above argument proves that a is the only term of a. We 
cannot escape by saying that c is to be a relation to the class-concept or the 
concept of the class or the class as many, for if there is any such entity as 
the class as one, there will be a relation, which we may call c, between terms 
and their classes as one. Thus the above argument leads to the conclusion 
that either (a) a collection of more than one term is not identical with the 
collection whose only term it is, or (f3) there is no collection as one term at 
all in the case of a collection of many terms, but the collection is strictly and 



514 Appendix A [487 

only many. One or other of these must be admitted in virtue of the above 
argument. 

488 . (a) To either of these views there are grave objections. The 

former is the view of Frege and Peano. To realize the paradoxical nature of 
this view, it must be clearly grasped that it is not only the collection as 
many, but the collection as one, that is distinct from the collection whose 
only term it is. (I speak of collections, because it is important to examine 
the bearing of Frege’s argument upon the possibility of an extensional 
standpoint.) This view, in spite of its paradox, is certainly the one which 
seems to be required by the symbolism. It is quite essential that we should 
be able to regard a class as a single object, that there should be a null-class, 
and that a term should not (in general, at any rate) be identical with the 
class of which it is the only member. It is subject to these conditions that 
the symbolic meaning of class has to be interpreted. Frege’s notion of a 
range may be identified with the collection as one, and all will then go well. 
But it is very hard to see any entity such as Frege’s range, and the argument 
that there must be such an entity gives us little help. Moreover, in virtue 
of the contradiction, there certainly are cases where we have a collection as 
many, but no collection as one (§ 104). Let us then examine (/?), and see 
whether this offers a better solution. 

(/?) Let us suppose that a collection of one term is that one term, and 
that a collection of many terms is (or rather are) those many terms, so that 
there is not a single term at all which is the collection of the many terms in 
question. In this view there is, at first sight at any rate, nothing para- 
doxical, and it has the merit of admitting universally what the Contradiction 
shows to be sometimes the case. In this case, unless we abandon one of our 
fundamental dogmas, c will have to be a relation of a term to its class-concept, 
not to its class; if a is a class-conoept, what appears symbolically as the class 
whose only term is a will (one might suppose) be the class-concept under 
which falls only the concept a, which is of course (in general, if not always) 
different from a. We shall maintain, on account of the contradiction, that 
there is not always a class-concept for a given propositional function <f>x, 
i.e. that there is not always, for every <f>, some class-concept a such that arc a 
is equivalent to <j>x for all values of x ; and the cases where there is no such 
class-concept will be cases in which <f> is a quadratic form. 

So far, all goes well. But now we no longer have one definite entity 
which is determined equally by any one of a set of equivalent propositional 
functions, i.e. there is, it might be urged, no meaning of class left which is 
determined by the extension alone. Thus, to take a case where this leads to 
confusion, if a and b be different class-concepts such that arc a and arc b are 
equivalent for all values of x y the class-concept under which a falls and 
nothing else will not be identical with that under which falls b and nothing 
else. Thus we cannot get any way of denoting what should symbolically 
correspond to the class as one. Or again, if u and v be similar but different 
classes, “similar to w” is a different concept from “similar to v”; thus, unless 
we can find some extensional meaning for class, we shall not be able to say 
that the number of u is the same as that of v. And all the usual elementary 
problems as to combinations (i.e. as to the number of classes of specified kindis 



489] The Logical and Arithmetical Doctrines of Frege 515 

contained in a given class) will have become impossible and even meaningless. 
For these various reasons, an objector might contend, something like the class 
as one must be maintained ; and Frege’s range fulfils the conditions required. 

] t would seem necessary therefore to accept ranges by an act of faith, without 
waiting to see whether there are such things. 

Nevertheless, the non-identification of the class with the class as one, 
whether in my form or in the form of Frege s range, appears unavoidable, 
and by a process of exclusion the class as many is left as the only object 
which can play the part of a class. By a modification of the logic hitherto 
advocated in the present work, we shall, I think, be able at once to satisfy 
the requirements of the Contradiction and to keep in harmony with common 
sense*. 

489. Let us begin by recapitulating the possible theories of classes which 
have presented themselves. A class may be identified with (a) the predicate, 
(fi) the class concept, (y) the concept of the class, (8) Frege’s range, (c) the 
numerical conjunction of the terms of the class, (f) the whole composed of 
the terms of the class. 

Of these theories, the first three, which are intensional, have the defect 
that they do not render a class determinate when its terms are given. 
The other three do not have this defect, but they have others. (8) suffers 
from a doubt as to there being such an entity, and also from the fact 
that, if ranges are terms, the contradiction is inevitable, (e) is logically 
unobjectionable, but is not a single entity, except when the class has only 
one member. (£) cannot always exist as a term, for the same reason as 
applies against (8); also it cannot be identified with the class on account 
of Frege’s argument t. 

Nevertheless, without a single object J to represent an extension, 
Mathematics crumbles. Two propositional functions which are equivalent 
for all values of the variable may not be identical, but it is necessary that 
there should be some object determined by both. Any object that may be 
proposed, however, presupposes the notion of class. We may define class 
optatively as follows : A class is an object uniquely determined by a 
propositional function, and determined equally by any equivalent propositional 
function. Now we cannot take as this object (as in other cases of symmetrical 
transitive relations) the class of propositional functions equivalent to a given 
propositional function, unless we already have the notion of class. Again, 
equivalent relations, considered intensionally, may be distinct; we want 
therefore to find some one object determined equally by any one of a set of 
equivalent relations. But the only objects that suggest themselves are the 
class of relations or the class of couples forming their common range ; and 
these both presuppose class. And without the notion of class, elementary 
problems, such as “ how many combinations can be formed of m objects n at 
a time?” become meaningless. Moreover, it appears immediately evident 
that there is some sense in saying that two class- concepts have the same 

* The doctrine to be advocated in what follows is the direct denial of the dogma stated 
in g 70, note. 

t Archiv i. p. 444. 

% For the use of the word object in the following discussion, see g 58, note. 



616 Appendix A [489 

extension, and this requires that there should be some object which can be 
called the extension of a class-concept. But it is exceedingly difficult to 
discover any such object, and the contradiction proves conclusively that, even 
if there be such an object sometimes, there are propositional functions for 
which the extension is not one term. 

The class as many, whicli we numliered (c) in the above enumeration, is 
unobjectionable, but is many and not one. We may, if we choose, represent 
this by a single symbol : thus .tc u will mean “ x is one of the it's.” This 
must not lie taken as a relation of two terms, x and w, because u as the 
numerical conjunction is not a single term, and we wish to have a meaning 
for xeu which would be the same if for u we substituted an equal class v, 
which prevents us from interpreting u intensionally. Thus we may regard 
il x is one of the ?j’k ” as expressing a relation of x to many terms, among 
which x is included. The main objection to this view, if only single terms can 
bo subjects, is that, if u is a symbol standing essentially for many terms, we 
cannot make u a logical subject without risk of error. We can no longer 
speak, one might suppose, of a class of classes ; for what should be the 
terms of such a class are not single terms, but are each many terms*. 
We cannot assert a predicate of many, one would suppose, except in 
the sense of asserting it of each of the many ; but what is required 
here is the assertion of a predicate concerning the many as many, not 
concerning each nor yet concerning the whole (if any) which all compose. 
Thus a class of classes will be many many’s ; its constituents will each be 
only many, and cannot therefore in any sense, one might suppose, be 
single constituents. Now I find myself forced to maintain, in spite of the 
apparent logical difficulty, that this is precisely what is required for the 
assertion of number. If we have a class of classes, each of whose members 
has two terms, it is necessary that the members should each Ik* genuinely 
two fold, and should not be each one. Or again, “Brown and Jones are two” 
requires that we should not combine Brown and Jones into a single whole, 
and yet it has the form of a subject-predicate proposition. But now a 
difficulty arises as to the number of members of a class of classes. In what 
sense can we speak of two couples? This seems to require that each couple 
should be a single entity ; yet if it were, we should have two units, not two 
couples. We require a sense for diversity of collections, meaning thereby, 
apparently, if n and v are the collections in question, that xtu and xtv are 
not equivalent for all values of x. 

490. The logical doctrine which is thus forced upon us is this : The 
subject of a proposition may be not a single term, but essentially many terms; 
this is the case with all propositions asserting numbers other than 0 and 1. 
But the predicates or class-concepts or relations which can occur in propositions 
having plural subjects are different (with some exceptions) from those that 
can occur in propositions having single terms as subjects. Although a class 
is many and not one, yet there is identity and diversity among classes, and 
thus classes can be counted as though each were a genuine unity; and in this 
sense we can speak of one class and of the classes which are members of a 

* Wherever the context requires it, the reader is to add “ provided the class in question 
(or all the classes in question) do not consist of a single term.” 



491 ] The Arithmetical and Logical Doctrines of Frege 517 

class of classes. Otic must be held, however, to be somewhat different when 
asserted of a class from what it is when asserted of a term; that is, there is 
a meaning of one which is applicable in speaking of one term, and another 
which is applicable in speaking of one clas but there is also a general 
meaning applicable to l>oth cases. The fundamental doctrine upon which 
all rests is the doctrine that the subject of a proposition may be plural, and 
that such plural subjects are what is meant by classes which have more than 
one term*. 

It will now be necessary to distinguish (1) terms, (2) classes, (3) classes 
of classes, and so on ad infinitum ; we shall have to hold that no member of 
one set is a member of any other set, and that xeu requires that x should l>e 
of a set of a degree lower by one than the set to which u Indongs. Thus xtx 
will become a meaningless proposition ; and in this way the contradiction is 
avoided. 

491. But we must now consider the problem of classes which have one 
member or none. The case of the null-class might be met by a bare denial — 
this is only inconvenient, not self-contradictory. But in the case of classes 
having only one term, it is still necessary to distinguish them from their sole 
members. This results from Frege’s argument, which we may repeat as 
follows. Let u be a class having more than one term ; let lu be the class of 
classes whose only member is u. Then ui has one member, u has many ; 
hence u and lu are not identical. It may be doubted, at first sight, whether 
this argument is valid. The relation of x to u expressed by xcu is a relation 
of a single term to many terms ; the relation of u to in expressed by ueiu is 
a relation of many terms (as subject) to many terms (as predicate) t- This 
is, so an objector might contend, a different relation from the previous one ; 
and thus the argument breaks down. It is in different senses that x is a 
member of u and that u is a member of m ; thus u and tu may be identical 
in spite of the argument. 

This attempt, however, to escape from Frege’s argument, is capable of 
refutation. For all the purposes of Arithmetic, to begin with, and for many 
of the purposes of logic, it is necessary to have a meaning for c which is 
equally applicable to the relation of a term to a class, of a class to a class of 
classes, and so on. But the chief point is that, if every single term is a class, 
the proposition xex, which gives rise to the Contradiction, must be admissible. 
It is only by distinguishing x and lx , and insisting that in xtu the u must 
always be of a type higher by one than x , that the contradiction can be 
avoided. Thus, although we may identify the class with the numerical 
conjunction of its terms, wherever there are many terms, yet where there is 
only one term we shall have to accept Frege’s range as an object distinct 
from its only term. And having done this, we may of course also admit a 
range in the case of a null propositional function. We shall differ from 
Frege only in regarding a range as in no case a term, but an object of a 
different logical type, in the sense that a propositional function ^(x), in 
which x may be any term, is in general meaningless if for x we substitute a 

* Cf. §§ 128, 132 ttupra. 

t The word predicate is here used loosely, not in the precise sense defined in § 48. 



518 Appendix A [491 

range; and if x may be any range of terms, <f> ( x ) will in general be meaning- 
less if for x we substitute either a term or a range of ranges of terms. 
Ranges, finally, are what are properly to be called classes, and it is of them 
that cardinal numbers are asserted. 

492. According to the view here advocated, it will be necessary, with 
every variable, to indicate whether its field of significance is terms, classes, 
classes of classes, or so on*. A variable will not be able, except in special 
cases, to extend from one of these sets into another ; and in X€U , the x and 
the u must always belong to different types ; e will not be a relation between 
objects of the same type, but c£ or c lit t will be, provided It is so. We shall 
have to distinguish also among relations according to the types to which 
their domains and converse domains belong ; also variables whose fields 
include relations, these being understood as classes of couples, will not as a 
rule include anything else, and relations between relations will be different 
in type from relations between terms. This seems to give the truth — though 
in a thoroughly extensional form — underlying Frege’s distinction between 
terms and the various kinds of functions. Moreover the opinion here 
advocated seems to adhere very closely indeed to common sense. 

Thus the final conclusion is, that the correct theory of classes is even 
more extensional than that of Chapter vi ; that the class as many is the 
only object always defined by a propositional function, and that this is 
adequate for formal purposes; that the class as one, or the whole composed 
of the terms of the class, is probably a genuine entity except where the class 
is defined by a quadratic function (see § 103), but that in these cases, and in 
other cases possibly, the class as many is the only object uniquely defined. 

The theory that there are different kinds of variables demands a reform 
in the doctrine of formal implication. In a formal implication, the variable 
does not, in general, take all the values of which variables are susceptible, but 
only all those that make the propositional function in question a proposition. 
For other values of the variable, it must be held that any given propositional 
function becomes meaningless. Thus in x*u, u must be a class, or a class of 
classes, or etc., and x must be a term if u is a class, a class if u is a class of 
classes, and so on; in every propositional function there will be some range 
permissible to the variable, but in general there will be possible values for 
other variables which are not admissible in the given case. This fact will 
require a certain modification of the principles of Symbolic Logic; but it 
remains true that, in a formal implication, all propositions belonging to a 
given propositional function are asserted. 

With this we come to the end of the more philosophical part of Frege’s 
work. It remains to deal briefly with his Symbolic Logic and Arithmetic; 
but here I find myself in such complete agreement with him that it is hardly 
necessary to do more than acknowledge his discovery of propositions which, 
when I wrote, I believed to have l>een new. 

493. Implication and Symbolic fjoyic. The relation which Frege 
employs as fundamental' in the logic of propositions is not exactly the same 
as what I have called implication: it is a relation which holds between 

* See Appendix B. t On this notation, see §§ 28, 97. 



494 ] The Arithmetical and Logical Doctrines of Frege 519 

P an d 9 whenever q is true or p is not true, whereas the relation which 
I employ holds whenever p and q are propositions, and q is true or p is false. 
That is to say, Frege’s relation holds when p is not a proposition at all, 
whatever q may be; mine does not hold unless p and q are propositions. 
His definition has the formal advantage that it avoids the necessity for 
hypotheses of the form “ p and q are propositions ” ; but it has the 
disadvantage that it does not lead to a definition of proportion and of 
negation. In fact, negation is taken by Frege as indefinable; proposition is 
introduced by means of the indefinable notion of a truth-value. Whatever 
x may be, “ the truth-value of x ” is to indicate the true if x is true, and the 
false in all other cases. Frege’s notation has certain advantages over Peano’s, 
in spite of the fact that it is exceedingly cumbrous and difficult to use. He 
invariably defines expressions for all values of the variable, whereas Peano’s 
definitions are often preceded by a hypothesis He has a special syml>ol for 
assertion, and he is able to assert for all values of x a propositional function 
not stating an implication, which Peano’s symbolism will not do. He also 
distinguishes, by the use of Latin ancl German letters respectively, between 
any proposition of a certain propositional function and all such propositions. 
By always using implications, Frege avoids the logical product of two 
propositions, and therefore has no axioms corresponding to Importation and 
Exportation*. Thus the joint assertion of p and q is the denial of “p implies 
not-^." 

494. Arithmetic . Frege gives exactly the same definition of cardinal 
numbers as I have given, at least if we identify his ramje with my class f. 
But following his intensional theory of classes, he regards the number as a 
property of the class-concept, not of the class in extension. If u be a range, 
the number of u is the range of the concept “ range similar to u” In the 
Orundlfujen der Arithmetic , other possible theories of number are discusssecl 
and dismissed. Numbers cannot be asserted of objects, because the same 
set of objects may have different numbers assigned to them (Gl. p. 29); for 
example, one army is so many regiments and such another number of 
soldiers. This view seems to me to involve too physical a view of objects : 
I do not consider the army to be the same object as the regiments. 
A stronger argument for the same view is that 0 will not apply to objects, 
but only to concepts (p. 59). This argument is, I think, conclusive up to a 
certain point; but it is satisfied by the view of the symbolic meaning of 
classes set forth in §73. Numbers themsehes, like other ranges, are things 
(p. G7). For defining numbers as ranges, Frege gives the same general 
ground as I have given, namely what 1 call the principle of abstraction 
In the Grundgeselze der Arithmetic, various theorems in the foundations of 
cardinal Arithmetic are proved with great elaboration, so great that it is 
often very difficult to discover the difference between successive steps in a 
demonstration. In view of the contradiction of Chapter x, it is plain that 
some emendation is required in Frege’s principles; but it is hard to believe 
that it can do more than introduce some general limitation which leaves the 
details unaffected. 

* See § 18, (7), (8). f See Gl. pp. 79, 85 ; G«. p. 57, Df. Z. : Gl. p. 79; cf. § 111 supra. 



520 Appendix A [495 

405. In addition to his work on cardinal numbers, Frege has, already 
in the Begriffsschrift , a very admirable theory of progressions, or rather 
of all series that can be generated by many-one relations. Frege does not 
coniine himself to one-one relations : as long as we move in only one direction, 
a many-one relation also will generate a series. In some parts of his theory, 
he even deals with general relations. He begins by considering, for any 
relation f(x, y), functions F which are such that, if f(x, y) holds, then F (x) 
implies F (y). If this condition holds, Frege says that the property F is 
inherited in the ^series (Bs. pp. 55 — 58). From this he goes on to define, 
without the use of numbers, a relation which is equivalent to “some positive 
power of the given relation.” This is defined as follows. The relation in 
question holds between x and y if every property F, which is inherited in the 
^-series and is such that f (x, z ) implies F(z) for all values of z, belongs to y 
(Bs. p. 60). On this basis, a non-numerical theory of series is very successfully 
erected, and is applied in Gg. to the proof of propositions concerning the 
number of finite numbers and kindred topics. This is, so far as I know, the 
best method of treating such questions, and Frege’s definition just quoted 
gives, apparently, the best form of mathematical induction. But as no 
controvers} r is involved, I shall not pursue this subject any further. 

Frege’s works contain much admirable criticism of the psychological 
standpoint in logic, and also of the formalist theory of mathematics, which 
believes that the actual symbols are the subject-matter dealt with, and that 
their properties can be arbitrarily assigned by definition. In both these 
points, I find myself in complete agreement with him. 

496. Kerry (loc. cit.) has criticized Frege very severely, and professes 
to have proved that a purely logical theory of Arithmetic is impossible 
(p. 304). On the question whether concepts can be made logical subjects, 
I find myself in agreement with his criticisms ; on other points, they seem 
to rest on mere misunderstandings. As these are such as would naturally 
occur to any one unfamiliar with symbolic logic, I shall briefly discuss them. 

The definition of numbers as classes is, Kerry asserts, a vartpov tr porepov. 
We must know that every concept has only one extension, and we must 
know what one object is; Frege’s numbers, in fact, are merely convenient 
symbols for what are commonly called numbers (p. 277). It must be 
admitted, I think, that the notion of a term is indefinable (cf. §132 supra), 
and is presupposed in the definition of the number 1. But Frege argues — 
and his argument at least deserves discussion — that one is not a predicate, 
attaching to every imaginable term, but has a less general meaning, and 
attaches to concepts (Gl. p. 40). Thus a term is not to be analyzed into one 
and term, and does not presuppose the notion of one (cf. §72 &upra). As to 
the assumption that every concept has only one extension, it is not necessary 
to be able to state this in language which employs the number 1 : all we 
need is, that if <f>x and are equivalent propositions for all values of x, 
then they have the same extension — a primitive proposition whose symbolic 
expression in no way presupposes the number 1. From this it follows that 
if a and b are both extensions of <f>x, a and b are identical, which again does 
not formally involve the number 1. In like manner, other objections to 
Frege’s definition can be met. 



496 ] The Arithmetical and Logical Doctrines of Frege 521 

Kerry is misled by a certain passage (Gl. p. 80, note) into the belief that 
Frege identifies a concept with its extension. The passage in question 
appears to assert that the number of u might be defined as the concept 
“ similar to u ” and not as the range of this concept; but it does not say 
that the two definitions are equivalent. 

There is a long criticism of Frege’s proof that 0 is a number, which 
reveals fundamental errors as to the existential import of universal 
propositions. The point is to prove that, if n and v are null-classes, they are 
similar. Frege defines similarity to mean that there is a one-one relation R 
such that 44 x is a u ” implies 44 there is a v to which x stands in the relation 
R” and vice versa. (I have altered the expressions into conformity with my 
usual language.) This, he says, is equivalent to “there is a one-one relation 
R such that 4 x is a u ’ and 4 there is no term of v to which x stands in the 
relation R' cannot both be true, whatever value x may have, and vice versa”; 
and this proposition is true if 44 x is a u" and 44 y is a v " are always false. 
This strikes Kerry as absurd (pp. 287 — 9). Similarity of classes, he thinks, 
implies that they have terms. He affirms that Freges assertion above is 
contradicted by a later one (Gl. p. 89): 44 If a is a u , and nothing is a v y 
then ‘a is a u ’ and 4 no term is a r which has the relation A* to are both 
true for all values of R” 1 do not quite know where Kerry finds the 
contradiction; but he evidently does not realize that false propositions imply 
all propositions and that universal propositions have no existential import, 
so that 44 all a is b ” and 44 no a is b *’ will both be true if a is the null-class. 

Kerry objects (p. 290, note) to the generality of Frege’s notion of relation. 
Frege asserts that any proposition containing a and b affirms a relation 
between a and b (Gl. p. 83), hence Kerry (rightly) concludes that it is 
self-contradictory to deny that a and b are related. So general a notion, 
he says, can have neither sense nor purpose. As for sense, that a and b 
should both be constituents of one proposition seems a perfectly intelligible 
sense; as for purpose, the whole logic of relations, indeed the whole of 
mathematics, may be adduced in answer. There is, however, what seems at 
first sight to be a formal disproof of Frege’s view. Consider the propositional 
function 44 R and S are relations which are identical, and the relation R does 
not hold between R and >V.” This contains two variables, R and S\ let us 
suppose that it is equivalent to “ R has the relation T to A’.” Then substi- 
tuting T for both R and S \ we find, since T is identical with T, that 44 T does 
not have the relation T to T" is equivalent to 44 T has the relation T to T.” 
This is a contradiction, showing that there is no such relation as T, Frege 
might object to this instance, on the ground that it treats relations as terms ; 
but his double ranges, which, like single ranges, he holds to be things, will 
bring out the same result. The point involved is closely analogous to that 
involved in the Contradiction: it was there shown that some propositional 
functions with one variable are not equivalent to any propositional function 
asserting membership of a fixed class, while here it is shown that some 
containing two variables are not equivalent to the assertion of any fixed 
relation. But the refutation is the same in the case of relations as it was in 
the previous case. There is a hierarchy of relations according to the type of 
objects constituting their fields. Thus relations between terms are distinct 



522 Appendix A [496 

from those between classes, and these again are distinct from relations 
between relations. Thus no relation can have itself both as referent and as 
relatum, for if it be of the same order as the one, it must be of a higher order 
than the other; the proposed propositional function is therefore meaningless 
for all values of the variables R and ti. 

It is affirmed (p. 291) that only the concepts of 0 and 1, not the objects 
themselves, are defined by Frege. But if we allow that the range of a 
Begriff is an object, this cannot be maintained; for the assigning of a concept 
will carry with it the assigning of its range. Kerry does not perceive that 
the uniqueness of 1 has been proved (ib.) : he thinks that, with Frege’s 
definition, there might be several l’s. I do not understand how this can be 
supposed: the proof of uniqueness is precise and formal. 

The definition of immediate sequence in the series of natural numbers 
is also severely criticized (p. 292 ff.). This depends upon the general theory' 
of series set forth in Bs. Kerry objects that Frege has defined “ F is 
inherited in the /-series,” but has not defined “the /-series” nor “ F' is 
inherited.” The latter essentially ought not to be defined, having no precise 
sense; the former is easily defined, if necessary, as the field of the relation / 
This objection is therefore trivial. Again, there is an attack on the definition : 
“ y follows x in the /-series if y has all the properties inherited in the /series 
and belonging to all terms to which x has the relation /*.” This criterion, 
we are told, is of doubtful value, l>ecause no catalogue of such properties 
exists, and further because, as Frege himself proves, following x is itself one 
of these properties, whence a vicious circle. This argument, to my mind, 
radically misconceives the nature of deduction. In deduction, a proposition 
is proved to hold concerning every member of a class, and may then be 
asserted of a particular member : but the proposition concerning every does 
not necessarily result from enumeration of the entries in a catalogue. 
Kerry’s position involves acceptance of Mill’s objection to Barbara, that the 
mortality of Socrates is a necessary premiss for the mortality of all men. 
The fact is, of course, that general propositions can often be established 
where no means exist of cataloguing the terms of the class for which they 
hold; and even, as we have abundantly seen, general propositions fully 
stated hold of all terms, or, as in the alx>ve case, of all functions, of which 
no catalogue can be conceived. Kerry’s argument, therefore, is answered 
by a correct theory of deduction; and the logical theory of Arithmetic is 
vindicated against its critics. 

Note, The second volume of Gg. , which appeared too late to be noticed 
in the Appendix, contains an interesting discussion of the contradiction 
(pp. 253 — 265), suggesting that the solution is to be found by denying that 
two propositional’functions which determine equal classes must be equivalent. 
As it seems very likely that this is the true solution, the reader is strongly 
recommended to examine Frege’s argument on the point. 

# Kerry omits the last clause, wrongly ; for not all properties inherited in the /-se ries 
belong to all its terms ; for example, the property of being greater than 100 is inherited iu 
the number-series. 



APPENDIX B. 


THE DOCTRINE OF TYPES. 

497. The doctrine of types is here put forward tentatively, as affording 
a possible solution of the contradiction ; but it requires, in all probability, 
to be transformed into some subtler shape before it can answer all diffi- 
culties. In case, however, it should be found to be a first step towards the 
truth, I shall endeavour in this Appendix to set forth its main outlines, as 
well as some problems which it fails to solve. 

Every propositional function ^(.r)— so it is contended—has, in addition 
to its range of truth, a range of significance, i.e . a range within which x 
must lie if $(x) is to be a proposition at all, whether true or false. This is 
the first point in the theory of types , the second point is that ranges of 
significance form types, ie. if x belongs to the range of significance of 
then there is a class of objects, the type of as, all of which must also belong 
to the range of significance of however $ may be varied; and the 
range of significance is always either a single type or a sum of several whole 
types. The second point is less precise than the first, and the case of 
numbers introduces difficulties ; hut in what follows its importance and 
meaning will, I hope, become plainer. 

A term or individual, is any object which is not a range. This is the 
lowest type of object. If such an object— say a certain point in space - 
occurs in a proposition, any other individual may always be substituted 
without loss of significance. What we called, in Chapter vi, the class as 
one, is an individual, provided its members are individuals : the objects of 
daily life, persons, tables, chairs, apples, etc., are classes as one. (A person 
is a class of psychical existents, the others are classes of material points, 
with perhaps some reference to secondary qualities.) These objects, there- 
fore, are of the same type as simple individuals. It would seem that all 
objects designated by single words, whether things or concepts, are of this 
type. Thus e.g. the relations that occur in actual relational propositions are 
of the same type as things, though relations in extension, which are what 
Symbolic Logic employs, are of a different type. (The intensional relations 
which occur in ordinary relational propositions are not determinate when 
their extensions are given, but the extensional relations of Symbolic Logic are 
classes of couples.) Individuals are the only objects of which numbers 
cannot be significantly asserted. 



524 


Appendix B [497 

The next type consists of ranges or classes of individuals. (No ordinal 
ideas are to be associated with the word range.) Thus “Brown and Jones ” 
is an object of this type, and will in general not yield a significant propo- 
sition if substituted ,for “ Brown ” in any true or false proposition of which 
Brown is a constituent. (This constitutes, in a kind of way, a justification 
for the grammatical distinction of singular and plural ; but the analogy is 
not close, since a range may have one term or more, and where it has many, 
it may yet appear as singular in certain propositions.) If w be a range 
determined by a propositional function not-w will consist of all objects for 
which <f>(x) is false, so that not -u is contained in the range of significance 
of </>(.r), and contains only objects of the same type as the members of u. 
There is a difficulty in this connection, arising from the fact that two propo- 
sitional functions </>(#), \f/(x) may have the same range of truth u, while their 
ranges of significance may be different ; thus not-w becomes ambiguous. 
There will always be a minimum type within which u is contained, and not- 
u may be defined as the rest of this type. (The sum of two or more types is a 
type ; a minimum type is one which is not such a sum.) In view of the 
Contradiction, this view seems the best ; for not -u must be the range of 
falsehood of “x is a u,” and “.>• is an x' } must be in general meaningless ; 
consequently “ x is a u” must require that x and u should be of different 
types. It is doubtful whether this result can be insured except by confining 
ourselves, in this connection, to minimum types. 

There is an unavoidable conflict with common sense in the necessity for 
denying that a mixed class ( i.e . one whose members are not all of the same 
minimum type) can ever be of the same type as one of its members. 
Consider, for example, such phrases as “Heine and the French.” If this is 
to be a class consisting of two individuals, “ the French ” must be under- 
stood as “the French nation,” i.e., as the class as one. If we are speaking 
of the French as many, we get a class consisting not of two members, but of 
one more than there are Frenchmen. Whether it is possible to form a class 
of which one member is Heine, while the other is the French as many, is a 
point to which I shall return later ; for the present it is enough to remark 
that, if there be such a class, it must, if the Contradiction is to be avoided, 
be of a different type both from classes of individuals and from classes of 
classes of individuals. 

The next type after classes of individuals consists of classes of classes of 
individuals. Such are, for example, associations of clubs ; the members of 
such associations, the clubs, are themselves classes of individuals. It will be 
convenient to speak of classes only where we have classes of individuals, of 
classes of classes only where we have classes of classes of individuals, and so 
on. For the general notion, I shall use the word range . There is a pro- 
gression of such t} r pes, since a range may be formed of objects of any given 
type, and the result is a range of higher type than its members. 

A new series of types begins with the couple with sense. A range of 
such types is what Symbolic Logic treats as a relation : this is the extensional 
view of relations. We may then form ranges of relations, or relations of 
relations, or relations of couples (such as separation in Projective Geometry*), 

* Cf. § 203. 



525 


498] The Doctrine of Types 

or relations of individuals to couples, and so on ; and in this way we get, 
not merely a single progression, but a whole infinite series of progressions. 
We have also the types formed of trios, which are the members of triple 
relations taken in extension as ranges ; but of trios there are several kinds 
that are reducible to previous types. Thus if <f>(x , y, z) be a propositional 
function, it may be a product of propositions • <k>(.V) • or a product 
z), or a proposition atxnit x and the couple (y, z), or it may be 
analyzahle in other analogous ways. In such cases, a new type does not arise. 
Hut if our proposition is not so analyzahle — and there seems no <i priori reason 
why it should always be so-— then we obtain a new type, namely the trio. 
We can form ranges of trios, couples of trios, trios of trios, couples of a trio 
and an individual, and so on. All these yield new types. Thus we obtain 
an immense hierarchy of types, and it is difficult to be sure how many there 
may be ; but the method of obtaining new types suggests that the total 
number is only a 0 (the number of finite integers), since the series obtained 
more or less resembles the series of nationals in the order 1, 2, ..., n, ..., 1/2, 
1/3, ..., l/n, ..., 2/3, ..., 2/5, ...2/(2a -r 1 ), ... This, however, is only a 
conjecture. 

Each of the types above enumerated is a minimum type ; i.e. t if <l>(x) be 
a propositional function which is significant for one value of x Ixdonging to 
one of the above types, then <f*(x) is significant for every value of x belonging 
to the said type. But it would seem - though of this 1 am doubtful that 
the sum of any number of minimum types is a type, i.e. is a range of signifi- 
cance for certain propositional functions. Whether or not this is universally 
true, alt ramjm certainly form a type, since every range has a number ; and 
so do all objects, since every object is identical with itself. 

Outside the above series of types lies the type proposition ; and from this 
as starting-point a new hierarchy, one might suppose, could be started ; but 
there are certain difficulties in the way of such a view, which render it 
doubtful whether propositions can be treated like other objects. 

498. Numbers, also, are a type lying outside the above series, and pre- 
senting certain difficulties, owing to the fact that every number selects 
certain objects out of every other type of ranges, namely those ranges which 
have the given number of members. This renders the obvious definition of 
0 erroneous ; for every type of range will have its own null-range, which will 
be a member of 0 considered as a range of ranges, so that we cannot say that 
0 is the range whose only member is the null-range. Also numbers require a 
consideration of the totality of types and ranges ; and in this consideration 
there may be difficulties. 

Since all ranges have numbers, ranges are a range ; consequently x<x is 
sometimes significant, and in these cases its denial is also significant. Con- 
sequently there is a range w of ranges for which X€X is false : thus the 
Contradiction proves that this range w does not belong to the range of 
significance of a**. We may observe that xc.t can only lie significant when a 
is of a type of infinite order, since, in X€U, u must always be of a type higher 
by one than a ; but the range of all ranges is of course of a type of infinite 

0r<1 Since numbers are a type, the propositional function is not a V 



626 


Appendix B [498 

where u is a range of numbers, must mean “ x is a number which is not a u ” ; 
unless, indeed, to escape this somewhat paradoxical result, we say that, 
although numbers are a type in regard to certain propositions, they are not 
a type in regard to such propositions as €t u is contained in v ” or “ x is a u ” 
Such a view is perfectly tenable, though it leads to complications of which it 
» hard to see the end. 

That propositions are a type results from the fact — if it be a fact — that 
only propositions can significantly l>e said to be true or false. Certainly 
true propositions appear to form a type, since they alone are asserted (cf. 
Appendix A. § 479). But if 60 , the number of propositions is as great as 
that of all objects absolutely, since every object is identical with itself, and 
“x is identical with x ” has a one-one relation to x. In this there are, 
however, two difficulties. First, what we called the propositional concept 
appears to be always an individual ; consequently there should be no more 
propositions than individuals. Secondly, if it is possible, as it seems to be, to 
form ranges of propositions, there must be more such ranges than there are 
propositions, although such ranges are only some among objects (cf. § 343). 
These two difficulties are very serious, and demand a full discussion. 

499 . The first point may be illustrated by somewhat simpler ones. 
There are, we know, more classes than individuals ; but predicates are 
individuals. Consequently not all classes have defining predicates. This 
result, which is also deducible from the Contradiction, shows how necessary 
it is to distinguish classes from predicates, and to adhere to the extensional 
view of classes. Similarly there are more ranges of couples than there are 
couples, and therefore more than there are individuals; but verbs, which 
express relations intensionally, are individuals. Consequently not every 
range of couples forms the extension of some verb, although every such 
range forms the extension of some propositional function containing two 
variables. Although, therefore, verbs are essential in the logical genesis of 
such propositional functions, the intensional standpoint is inadequate to give 
all the objects which Symbolic Logic regards as relations. 

In the case of propositions, it seems as though there were always an 
associated verbal noun which is an individual. We have “ x is identical 
with x ” and “ the self-identity of x,” “ x differs from y ” and “ the difference 
of x and y ” ; and so on. The verbal noun, which is what we called the 
propositional concept, appears on inspection to be an individual ; but this is 
impossible, for “ the self-identity of x ” has as many values as there are 
objects, and therefore more values than there are individuals. This results 
from the fact that there are propositions concerning every conceivable object, 
and the definition of identity shows (§ 2G) that every object concerning which 
there are propositions, is identical with itself. The only method of evading 
this difficulty is to deny that propositional concepts are individuals; and 
this seems to be the course to which we are driven. It is undeniable, 
however, that a propositional concept and a colour are two objects ; hence 
we shall have to admit that it is possible to form mixed ranges, whose 
members are not all of the same type , but such ranges will be always of 
a different type from what we may call pure ranges, i.e. such as have only 
members of one type. The propositional concept seems, in fact, to be nothing 



527 


500] The Doctrine of Types 

other than the proposition itself, the difference being merely the psychological 
one that we do not assert the proposition in the one case, and do assert it in 
the other. 

500. The second point presents greater difficulties. We cannot deny 
that there are ranges of propositions, for we often wish to assert the logical 
product of such ranges ; yet we cannot admit that there are more ranges 
than propositions. At first sight, the difficulty might be thought to be 
solved by the fact that there is a proposition associated with every range of 
propositions which is not null, namely the logical product of the propositions 
of the range*; but this does not destroy Cantor's proof that a range has 
more sub-ranges than members. Let us apply the proof by assuming a 
particular one-one relation, which associates every proposition p which is not 
a logical product with the range whose only member is p y while it associates 
the product of all propositions with the null-range of propositions, and 
associates every other logical product of propositions with the range of its 
own factors. Then the range w which, by the general principle of Cantor's 
proof, is not correlated witli any proposition, is the range of propositions 
which are logical products, but are not themselves factors of themselves. 
But, by the definition of the correlating relation, w ought to be correlated 
with the logical product of w. It will be found that the old contradiction 
breaks out afresh ; for we can prove that the logical product of w both is and 
is not a member of w. This seems to show that there is no such range as w; 
but the doctrine of types does not show why there is no such range. It seems 
to follow that the Contradiction requires further subtleties for its solution; 
but what these are, I am at a loss to imagine. 

Let us state this new contradiction more fully. If to be a class of 
propositions, the proposition “ every m is true ” may or may not be itself an 
m. But there is a one-one relation of this proposition to m: if n be different 
from to, “ every n is true ” is not the same proposition as “ every to is true." 
Consider now the whole class of propositions of the form 44 every m is true,” 
and having the property of not being members of their respective to’ s. Let 
this class be w , and let p be the proposition “ every w is true.” If p is a w 9 
it must possess the defining property of w\ but this property demands that 
p should not be a w. On the other hand, if p be not a w, then p does possess 
the defining property of w> and therefore is a w. Thus the contradiction 
appears unavoidable. 

In order to deal with this contradiction, it is desirable to reopen the 
question of the identity of equivalent propositional functions and of the 
nature of the logical product of two propositions. These questions arise 
as follows. If to be a class of propositions, their logical product is the 
proposition “ every in is true," which I shall denote by a ‘to. If we now 
consider the logical product of the class of propositions composed of to 

* It might be doubted whether the relation of ranges of propositions to their logical 
products iB one- one or many- one. For example, does the logical product of p and q and r 
differ from that of pq and r? A reference to the definition of the logical product (p. 21) 
will Bet this doubt at rest ; for the two logical products in question, though equivalent, are 
by no means identical. Consequently there is a one-one relation of all ranges of propositions 
to some propositions, which is directly contradictory to Cantor’s theorem. 



528 


Appendix B [500 

together with a ‘mi, this is equivalent to “ Every m is true and every m 
is true,’ t.«. to “every m is true” it. to Thus the logical product 
of the new class of propositions is equivalent to a member of the new class, 
which is the same as the logical product of m. Thus if we identify equivalent 
propositional functions (a ‘ m being a propositional function of m), the proof 
of the above contradiction fails, since every proposition of the form a‘m is 
the logical product both of a class of which it is a member and of a class of 
which it is not a member. 

But such an escape is, in reality, impracticable, for it is quite self-evident 
that equivalent propositional functions are often not identical. Who will 
maintain, for example, that “x is an even prime other than 2” is identical 
with “x is one of Charles II.’s wise deeds or foolish sayings”! Yet these 
are equivalent, if a well-known epitaph is to be credited. The logical product 
of all the propositions of the class composed of m and is “Every proposition 
which either is an m or asserts that every m is true, is true”; and this is not 
identical with “ every m is true,” although the two are equivalent. Thus 
there seems no simple method of avoiding the contradiction in question 

The close analogy of this contradiction with the one discussed in 
Chapter x strongly suggests that the two must have the same solution, 
or at least very similar solutions. It is possible, of course, to hold that 
propositions themselves are of various types, and that logical products must 
have propositions of only one type as factors. But this suggestion seems 
harsh and highly artificial. 

To sum up: it appears that the special contradiction of Chapter x is 
solved by the doctrine of types, but that there is at least one closely 
analogous contradiction which is probably not soluble by this doctrine. 
The totality of all logical objects, or of all propositions, involves, it would 
seem, a fundamental logical difficulty. What the complete solution of the 
difficulty may be, I have not succeeded in discovering; but as it affects the 
very foundations of reasoning, I earnestly commend the study of it to the 
attention of all students of logic. 



INDEX 


The reference s are to pages. References in black type are to passages 
where a technical term is defined or explained. 


Absolute, 226, 448 

Abstraction, principle of, ix, 166, 219, 242, 
285, 305, 314, 497, 519 
Acceleration, 474, 483; 

absolute, 490, 491 
Achilles and the tortoise, 350, 358 
Action and Reaction, 483 
Activity, 450 

Addition, arithmetical, 118, 307; of indi- 
viduals, 71, 133-135; logical, 17, 21, 
116; ordinal, 318; of quantities, 179, 
180; relational, 182, 254 -, of relations, 
321 ; relative, 26, 387 n . ; of vectors, 
477 

Adjectives, 20 n., 42 
Aggregates, 67, 139, 442 ; 

and classes as one, 141; infinite, 143 
Algebra, universal, 376 
Aliorelative, 203 n., 320 n. 

All, 72, 105, 113, 305 

Analysis, how far falsification, 141, 466; 

conceptual and real, 466 
And, 67, 69, 71, 130 
Angles, 205, 414; 

axioms of, 415, 416 
Anharmonic ratio, 390, 391, 420 
Antinomies, of infinity, 188, 190-193; 

Kant’s, 259, 458-461 
Any, 46, 46, 57, 105, 263, 305, 351 ; 

and kindred words, 55, 56, 59, 89, 91 
Archimedes, axiom of, 181, 252, 254, 288, 
332, 333, 337, 408 
Area, 333, 417 

Arithmetic, has no indemonstrables, 127 ; 

and progressions, 240; relation-, 321 
Arrow, Zeno’s argument of, 350 
Assertion, 34-35, 48, 100, 502 ff. 
Assertions, 39, 44, 82, 83, 98, 106, 505 
Associative law, 307 
Assumptions, 503 
Axioms, iu Geometry, 373, 441 

Being, 43, 49, 71, 446, 449 
Bernouilli, 329 n. 

Bernstein, 306 n., 367 n. 

Bettazzi, 181 w., 185 
Between, 200, 201, 205, 207, 214; 
three theories of, 208; is a relation 


. between its terms? 210; and difference 
of sense, 211; indefinable? 213; in 
projective Geometry, 391, 393, 426; in 
descriptive Geometry, 393 
Bolyai, 373 

Bolzano, 70, 201 n., 307, 357 n. 

Boole, 10, 24, 376 
Borcl, 306 m., 367 w. 

Bradley, 41, 43 a., 47, 90, 99, 161 221, 
224, 448, 471 

Burali-Forti, 112 m., 323, 364 w. 

Calculus, propositional, 13*18; of classes, 
18-23; of relations, 23-26; logical, 142; 
infinitesimal, 259, 276, 304, 325-380, 
338 ff.; principles of a, 376 
Cantor, Georg, viii, 101, 111, 112, 119, 120, 
121 n., 144, 157, 161, 177, 199, 239 m., 
245, 259 ff., 267, 270 ff., 282, 331, 334, 
347, 350, 353, 371, 37 5, 381, 390, 
437 444, 527 ; 

on irrationals, 283; on continuity, 287 ff.; 
on transfinite cardinals, 304-311; on 
transfinite ordinals, 312-324; on infi- 
nitesimal segments, 335; on orders of 
infinity, 336 ; against greatest number, 
363 ff. 

Carroll, Lewis, 18 n., 35 
Cassirer, 287 n. 

Cauchy , 329 n. 

Causal laws, 481, 486 
Causality, 474-479, 481; 

in rational dynamics, 479 
Causation, of particulars by particulars, 
vii, 475, 477, 481, 487 
Cause, equal to effect? 496 
Cayley, 422 m. 

Chain, 245, 246; 

of an element, 245, 246 
Change, 347, 469 ff. 

Chasles, 420 

Circle, postulate of, 438, 440 
Class, v, ix, 18 ff., 40, 66-81, 349, 356, 
497, 510 ff.; 

extensional view of, 20, 67, 69, 131 ff., 
513, 526; infcensional genesis of, 67, 515; 
concept of, 67; as many, 68, 76, 104, 
106, 132; as one, 76, 103, 104, 106, 



530 


Index 


132, 513, 523; always definable by a 
predicate? 98, 526; when a member of 
itself, 102; defined by relation, 97, 98; 
of terms not having a given relation to 
themselves, 102; multiplicative, 308; in- 
finite, 72, 106, 260, 306, 356, 357; de- 
numerable, 309 ; and well-ordered series, 
322; of one term, see Individual 
Class- concept, 19, 20, 54, 56, 58, 67, 101, 
113; 

distinct from class, 68, 116, 131, 514 
Clifford, 434 

Cohen, 276 n., 326, 338-345 
Collections, 69, 133, 140, 513, 514 
Colours, 466, 467 

Commutative law, 118, 240, 307, 812 
Composition, 17, 31 
Concepts, 44, 211, 508 ; 

as such and as terms, 45; variation of, 
86 ; propositional, 503, 526 ; can they 
be subjects? 46, 507, 510 
Congruent figures, 417 
Conjunction, numerical, 57, 67, 72, 113, 
131 ff. ; propositional, 57 ; variable, 57 
Connection, 202, 239 
Consecutive, 201 

Constants, logical, 3, 7, 8, 11, 106, 429; 
and parameters, 6 

Constituent, of a proposition, 356, 510 ; 

of a whole, 143, 144 
Continuity, 188, 193, 259, 286 ff., 368; 
Dedekind’s axiom of, 279, 294 ; ordinal, 
296-303; philosophy of, 346-354; anti- 
nomies of, 347 ff. ; in projective Geo- 
metry, 387, 390, 437 ; of Euclidean 
space, 438 ff. 

Continuum, in philosophical sense, 146, 
440; in mathematical Bense, 297, 299 n., 
310; composed of elemeuts, 344|" 347, 
353, 440 ff.; primarily arithmetical, 444 
Contradiction, the, vi, ix, 20, 06, 79, 97, 
101-107, 305, 362, 513, 515, 617, 523, 
524, 525; 

Frege’s solution of, 522; law of, 455 
Coordinates, 439 ; projective, 385, 388, 390, 
422, 427 

Correlation, 260 ; of classes, 261 ; of series, 
261, 321 

Counting, 114, 133, 309 
Couples, are relations classes of? 24, 99, 
524; with sense, 99, 512, 524 
Couples, separation of, 200, 205, 214, 237 ; 
and transitive asymmetrical relations, 
215, 238; m projective geometry, 386, 
387 

Couturat, 66, 194 w., 267 n., 291 «., 296 n. t 
310 n., 326 n., 410n., 441 n. 

Cremona, 384 w., 420 

Dedekind, 90, 111, 157, 199, 239 n., 245- 
251, 294, 307, 315, 357 n., 381, 387, 438; 
on irrationals, 278 ff. 

Deduction, 522 ; principles of, 4, 15, 16 
Definition, 15, 27, 111, 429, 497; 
and the , 62; always nominal, 1 12; by 
abstraction, 114, 219, 249 


De Morgan, 23, 64n., 218n., 219n., 826, 376 
Denoting, 45, 47 , 53, 106, 131; 
and predicates, 54; and any, etc., 55, 62; 
are there different kinds of? 56, 61 ; and 
identity, 63 ; and infinite classes, 72, 73, 
145, 350 

Derivatives, of a series, 290 ff., 323; of 
functions, 328 
Descartes, 157 

Dichotomy, Zcno’B argument of, 348 
Differential coefficients, 173, 323 
Dimensions, 372, 374; definable logically, 
376 ; axiom of three, 388, 399 
Dini, 324 w., 327, 328 329 n. 

Direction, 435 

Disjunction, 15«., 17, 31; variable afid 
constant, 22, 58 

Distance, 171, 179, 182 195, 252-256, 
288, 353; 

measurement of, 180, 181, 254, 408; and 
order, 204, 409, 419; and relative posi- 
tion, 252; not implied by order, 252, 
254 ; definition of, 253 ; and limits, 254 ; 
and stretch, 254, 342, 352, 408 ff., 435; 
in Arithmetic, 254; axioms of, 407 ff., 
413, 424 ; and straight line, 410 ; pro- 
jective theory of, 422, 425, 427 ; de- 
scriptive theory of, 423-5 
Distributive law, 240, 307 
Diversity, 23 ; conceptual, 46 
Divisibility, infinite, 460 
Divisibility, magnitude of, 149, 151, 153, 
173, 230, 333, 345, 411, 425, 428; and 
measurement, 178; not a property of 
wholes as such, 179, 412 
Domain, see Relation 
Duality, logical, 26; geometrical, 375, 392 
Du Bois Iteymond, 181 n. v 254, 336 
Dynamics, vi ; as pure mathematics, 465 ; 
two principles of, 496 

Economics, mathematical, 233 n. 
Electricity, 494, 496 
Empiricism, 373, 492 
Epistemology, 339 

Equality, 219, 389 ; of classes, 21 ; of re- 
lations, 24 ; of quantities, 159 
Equivalence, of propositions, 15, 527 
Ether, 485, 496 

Euclid, 157, 287, 373, 404, 420, 438 ; 

his errors, 405-407 
Euler, 329 n. 

Evellin, 352 

Existence, vii, 449, 458, 472; 
of a class, 21, 32 

Existence-theorems, ix, 322, 431, 497; 

and Euclid’s problems, 404 
Exponentiation, 120, 308 
Exportation, 16 
Extension and Intension, 66 

Fano, 385 n. 

Field, see Relation 
Finite, 121, 192, 371 

Finitude, axiom of, 188, 191, 460; abso- 
lute and relative, 332 



Index 


531 


Force, 474, 482 
Formal truth, 40, 105 
Formalism, limits of, 16, 41 
Formula, 267 
Fractions, 149, 150, 151 
Frege, vi, viii, 19, 08n., 78 Ill, 124 n., 
132, 142, 451 w., 501 ff. ; 
three points of disagreement with, 501 ; 
hiB three elements in judgment, 502 ; 
hiB sign of judgment, 503, 519; his 
theory of ranges, 505, 510 ff. ; his Be- 
griff, 505, 507 ; his Symbolic Logic, 518 ; 
his Arithmetic, 519 ; his theory of pro- 
gressions, 520 ; Kerry’s criticism of, 520 
Frischauf, 410 

Functions, 32, 262, 263; non-serial, 263; 
numerical, 265 ; complex, 266, 376 ; real, 
324 ; continuous, 326 ; Frege’s theory of, 
505 ff. 

Functions, propositional, 13, 19, 82-88, 92, 
263, 356, 508 ff. ; definable ? 83 ; inde- 
finable, 88, 106; more numerous than 
terms? 103; and the contradiction, 103; 
with two variables, 94, 506 ; and classes, 
19, 88, 93, 98 ; variable, 103, 104 ; car- 
dinal number of, 367 ; range of signifi- 
cance of, 523 
Fundamental bodie s 491 

Generalization, 7 ; algebraical, 267, 377 
Geometry, 199, 372 ; distance and stretch 
theories of, 181 ; and actual space, 372, 
374 ; three kinds of, 381 ; based on dis- 
tance, 410, 492; and order, 419; lias no 
indemon strables, 429 

Geometry, descriptive, 199, 382, 393-403 ; 
indefinables of, 394, 395, 397; axioms 
of, 394 ff.; their mutual independence, 
396; relation to projective Geometry, 
400 ff. ; and distance, 423-425 
Geometry, elliptic, 20G, 382, 391, 399, 413; 
Euclidean, 391, 399, 442 ; hyperbolic, 
255, 382, 391, 399; non-Euclidean, 158, 
179, 255, 373, 381, 436; of position, 393 
Geometry, metrical, 382, 392, 403, 404-418; 
and quantity, 407 ; and distance, 407 ; 
and stretch, 414 ; relation to projective 
and descriptive Geometry, 419-428 
Geometry, projective, 199, 206, 381-392 ; 
and order, 385 ff., 389, 421 ; requires 
three dimensions, 394,399/1.; differences 
from descriptive Geometry, 419 ; inde- 
pendent of metrical Geometry, 419-421 ; 
history of, 420 ; and distance, 421, 425, 427 
Gilman, 203 n. 

Grammar, 42, 497 
Grassmann, 376 
Gravitation, 485, 487, 490, 491 
Greater, 122, 159, 222, 306, 323, 364 
Groups, continuous, 436 

Hamilton, 376 
Harmonic relation, 384 
Hegel, 105, 137, 287, 34 6, 355 
Helmholtz, 241 
Hertz, 494-496 


Heymans, 489 

Hilbert, 384?/., 405n., 415 n. 

Idea and object, 450 
Identity, 20, 96, 219, 502; 
distinguished from equality, 21 ; and 
denoting, 63 ; of indiscernibles, 451 
Imaginaries, 376 
Impenetrability, 467, 480 
Implication, formal, 5, 11, 14, 36 - 41 , 89, 
106, 518 ; asserts a class of material 
implications, 38; and any, etc., 91 
Implication, material, 14 , 26, 33-36, 106, 
203 n. ; Frege’s theory of, 518 
Importation, 16 

Inclusion, of classes, 19, 36, 40, 78 
Incommensurables, 287, 438, 439 
Ihcornpaiibility, synthetic, 233 
Indefinables, v, 112 
Indication, 502 

Individual, relation to class, 18, 19, 26, 
77, 103, 512, 522; distinct from class 
whose only member it is? vi, 23, 68, 
106, 130, 513, 514, 517 
Induction, 11 n., 441 ; mathematical, 123, 
192, 240, 245, 216, 248, 260, 307, 314, 
315, 357, 371, 520 
Inertia, law of, 482 
Inextensive, 342 

Inference, asyllogistic, 10; and deduction, 
11 n. ; logicul and psychological, 33; two 
premisses unnecessary, 35 
Infinite, 121, 259, 260, 315, 368 ; 

antinomies of, 188, 190, 355 ; not spe- 
cially quantitative, 194; as limit of 
segments, 273 ; mathematical theory of, 
304, 355; philosophy of, 355-368; im- 
proper, 331-337 ; orders of, 335 
Infinitesimal, 188, 260, 276, 325, 330, 331- 
337; 

defined, 331; instances of, 332; philo- 
sophy of, 338-345 ; and continuity, 344 ; 
and change, 347 

Integers, infinite classes of, 299, 310 n. 

Integral, definite, 329 

Intensity, 164 

Interaction, 446, 453 

Intuition, 260, 339, 456 

Involution, 385, 426 

Is, 49, 64 100, 106 

Isolated points, 290 

Jevons, 376 
Johnson, viii, 435 n. 

Jordan, 329 n. 

Kant, 4, 143, 158, 168, 177, 184, 223 «., 
227, 259, 326, 339, 342, 355, 373, 442, 
446, 450, 454, 456-461, 489 
Kerry, 505, 520-522 

Killing, 400n., 404 n., 405 w., 415 a., 434 /t. 
Kinetic axes, 490 
Kirchoff, 474 

Klein, 385, 389, 390//., 421, 422//., 424 a., 
426//., 434//., 436 



532 


Index 


Kronecker, 241 
Law, 208 

Leibniz, 5, 10, 132, 143, 144, 145 w., 221, 
222, 227, 228, 252, 287, 300, 325, 
329 338, 342, 347, 355, 410, 440 w., 

445, 450, 451, 450, 401, 489, 492 
Lie, 430 

Likeness, 242 , 261, 262 , 317, 321 
Limitation, principle of, 314 
Limiting-point, 290 , 323 
Limits, 276 ff., 320, 361 ; and infinity, 
188, 189, 260; and continuity, 353; 
conditions for existence of, 291 if., 389; 
and the infinitesimal calculus, 325, 339 ; 
of functions, 327, 328 ; and magnitude, <341 
Line, see Straight 
Line-Geometry, 432 

Linearity, axiom of, 181, 252, 254, 408 
Lobatchewsky, 373 

Logic, symbolic, 10-32; three parts of, 11; 
and mathematics, v, 5, 8, 106, 397, 429, 
457 

Lotze, 221, 446 ff. 

Macaulay, 491 
Mach, 474, 489, 492 

Magnitude, 159, 164 ff., 194; relative theory 
of, 162; absolute theory of, 164; axioms 
of, 163, 165, 168; kinds of, 164, 334 ; 
and divisibility, 173; and existence, 174, 
177, 342; extensive, 182; intensive, 182, 
326, 342; discrete and continuous, 193, 
346 ; positive and negative, 229-231 ; 
infinitesimal, 332; limiting, 341 
Manifold, 67 

Mass, 481 n., 483, 488, 495 ; 
centre of, 490 

Mathematics, pure, vii, 3, 106, 112, 397, 
429, 456, 497; applied, 5, 8, 112, 429; 
arithmetization of, 259 
Matter, 465-468 ; as substance, 466 ; 
relation to space and time, 467 ; logical 
definition of, 468 
Maxwell, 489 
MoColl, 12, 13, 22 
Meaning, 47, 502 
Measure, Zeno’s argument of, 352 
Measurement, 157, 176-183, 195 ; 

Meinong, 55 n., 162 n., 168, 171 n., 173 n., 
181 n., 184, 187, 252, 253, 289, 419, 502n., 
503 

Mill, 373, 522 
MObius net, 385, 388 
Monadism, 476 
Monism, 44, 447 

Moore, viii, 24, 44 n., 51 w., 446 n., 448 n., 
454 n. 

Motion, 265, 344, 405, 469-473 ; 

state of, 351, 473 ; in geometry, 406, 418; 
logical definition of, 473; laws of, 
482-488 ; absolute and relative, 489-493 ; 
Hertz’s law of, 495 

Motions, kinematical, 480 ; kinetic, 480 ; 
thinkable, 494; possible, 495; natural, 
495 


Multiplication, arithmetical, 119, 307, 308 ; 
ordinal, 318 

nth, 243, 250, 312 
Necessity, 454 

Negation, of propositions, 18 , 31 ; of classes, 
23, 31, 524; of relations, 25 
Neumann, 490 

Newton, 325, 338, 469, 481, 482-492 
Noel, 348, 352 

Null-class, vi, 22, 23, 32, 38, 68, 73, 106, 
617, 525 

Number, algebraical generalization of, 267 
Number, cardinal, logical theory of, 111 ff., 
241, 519, 520-522; definable? Ill, 112, 
130; defined, 115, 305; and classes, 112, 
305, 300, 519 ; defined by abstraction, 114 ; 
transfimte, 112,260,304-311; finite, 124, 
260, 357; Dedekind’s definition of, 247, 
249 ; Cantor’s definition of, 304; addition 
of, 118, 307 ; multiplication of, 119, 307, 
308 ; of finite integers, 122, 309, 364 ; 
well-ordered, 323 , 364 ; of the continuum, 
310, 364 ; is there a greatest? 101, 362 ff.; 
of cardmal numbers, 362 ; of classes, 362; 
of propositions, 362,526, 527 ; as a logical 
type, 525 

Number, ordinal, 240, 319; defined, 242, 
317; Dedekind’s definition of, 248; not 
prior to cardinal, 241, 249-251; trans- 
finite, 240 260, 312-324 ; finite, 243, 

260 ; of finite ordinals, 243, 313 ; second 
class of, 312, 315, 322 ; two principles of 
formation of, 313; addition of, 317; 
subtraction of, 317; multiplication of, 
318 ; division of, 318 ; no greatest, 323, 
364 ; positive and negative, 244 
Number, relation-, 262, 321 
Numbers, complex, 372, 376 ff., 379 ; 

ordinal, series of, 323 ; positive and 
negative, 229 ; real, 270 
Numbers, irrational, 157, 270ff., 320; arith- 
metical theories of, 277 ff. 

Numbers, rational, 149 ff., 259, 335; car- 
dinal number of, 310; ordinal type of, 
296, 316, 320 

Object, 55 n. 

Occupation (of space or time), 465, 469, 
471, 472 

One, 241, 356, 520; definable? 112, 130, 
135 ; applicable to individuals or to 
classes? 130, 132, 517 
Oppositeness, 96, 205 
Order, 199 ff., 207-217, 255; 
not psychological, 242 ; cyclic, 199 ; and 
infinity, 188, 189, 191, 195; in projective 
space, 385 ff ., 389 ; in descriptive space, 
394, 395 

Ordinal element, 200, 353 

Padoa, 111 m., 114 m., 125, 205 

Parallelism, psychophysical, 177 

Parallelogram law, 477 

Parallels, uxiom of, 404 

Part, 360 ; proper, 121, 246 n . ; ordinal, 361 ; 



Indea 


533 


three kinds of, 138, 143; similarity to 
whole, 121, 143, 306, 316, 350, 365, 368, 371 
Pascal, 420 

Pasch, 390 n., 391 n., 393 ff., 407 m., 417 
Peano, vi, vii. 4, 10 ff., 23, 26-32, 36, 62, 
68, 78 ff., Ill, 114, 115, 131, 139, 142, 
152, 159 n., 163m., 199, 205m., 219, 
241 n., 248, 270, 290, 300 n., 328 n., 
334 n., 335, 341, 360, 410, 437, 443, 
501, 514, 519; 

his indetinables, 27, 112 ; his indemon- 
Btrables, 29 ; his Arithmetic, 124-128, 
238 «.; on real numbers, 274; on de- 
scriptive geometry, 393 ff. ; on theory of 
vectors, 432 
Pearson, 474, 489 

Peirce, 23, 26, 203 m., 232 m., 320 n., 376, 
387 w. 

Pencils of planes, 400 

Perception, its function in philosophy, v, 129 

Permutations, 316 

Philosophy, of Mathematics, 4, 226 ; dis- 
tinguished from Mathematics, 128 ; and 
Mathematics, 338 
Pieri, 199, 216 w, 382 ff., 410, 421 
Planes, projective, 384 ; kinds of, 3yi ; 
descriptive, 398 ; ideal, 400, 402 ; metri- 
cal, 410 

Plato, 73, 355, 357, 438, 446 
Pleasure, quantity of, 162, 174 ; magnitude 
of, 164 ; and pain, 233 n. 

Pluralism, viii 
Poincar6, 347 
Point- pairs, 426 
Points, 382, 394, 437, 443; 

rational and irrational, 389 ; ideal, 400 ; 
proper and improper ideal, 423 ; ima- 
ginary, 420; logical objections to, 445-455; 
material, 445; indiscernible? 446, 451 
Position, absolute and relativj, 220, 221, 
444 ff. 

Power, 364 n. See Number , cardinal 
Predicates, 45, 56 ; predicable of themselves, 
96, 97, 102 

Premiss, empirical, 441 
Presentations, 446, 450 
Primes, ordinal, 319 
Process, endless. See Regress. 

Product, logical, of propositions, 16, 519, 
527 ; of classes, 21 
Product, relative, 25, 98 
Progressions, 199, 239 ff., 247, 283, 313, 
314, 520 ; 

existence of, 322, 497 
Projection, 390, 393 
Proper names, 42, 44, 502 
Propositions, ix, 13, 15, 211, 502, 525; 
unity of, 50, 51, 107, 139, 466, 507; when 
analyzable into subject and assertion, 
83 ff., 106, 505-510 ; can they be infinite- 
ly complex? 145; cardinal number of, 
367 ; contradiction as to number of, 527 ; 
existential theory of, viii, 449, 493 

Quadratic forms, 104, 512, 514 
Quadrics, 403 


Quadrilateral construction, 333, 384 ; in 
metrical geometry, 417 
Quantity, 159; relation to number, 157, 
158, 1G0 ; not always divisible, 160, 170; 
sometimes a relation, 161, 172 ; range of, 
170-175; and infinity, 188; does not 
occur in pure mathematics, 168, 419 
Quaternions, 432 

Ranges, 511 ff., 524; extensional or iu- 
tensional? 511; double, 512 
Ratio, 149, 335 

Rays, 231, 398, 414; order of, 415 
Reality, Kant ’0 category of, 342, 344 
Reduction, 17 
Referent, 24 , 96, 99, 263 
Regress, endless. 50, 99, 223, 348 
Regression, 291, 300, 320 
Relation, 95, 107 ; peculiar to two terms, 25, 
99, 268; domain of, 26, 97, 98; converse 
domain of, 97, 98 ; field of, 97, 98 ; in 
itself and aH relating, 49, 100; of a term 
to itself, 86, 96, 97, 105; definable as a 
class of couples? 99, 512; of a relation 
to itB terms, 99 ; fundamental, 112 ; when 
analyzable, 163; particularized by its 
terms, 51 m., 52, 211; finite, 262 
Relations, intensional view of, 24, 523, 526; 
extensional view of, 99, 523, 526 ; mon- 
istic and monadistic theories of, 221 ff. ; 
as functions of two vaiiahles, 507, 521 ; 
converse of, 26, 95, 97, 201 it., 228; reality 
of? viii, 99, 221, 224, 446 ff. ; sense of, 86, 
95, 99, 107, 225, 227; difference from 
numbers, 95; with assigned domains, 26, 
20H ; types of, 8, 23, 403, 436 ; symmetri- 
cal, 25, 96, 114, 203 n., 218; asymmetrical , 
25, 200, 203m., 218-226; not- symmetrical, 
25, 96, 218; transitive, 114, 203, 218; in- 
transitive, 218; not-transitive, 218; re- 
flexive, 114, 159n., 219, 220; many-one, 
114, 246m; one-one, 113, 130, 305; non- 
repeating, 232 m.; serial, 242; propo- 
sitional, 510; triangular, 204, 211, 471, 
472. See Verbs 

Relation-number. See Number , relation- 
Relatum, 24, 96, 99, 263 
Representation, of a system, 245 
Resemblance, immediate, 171 
Rest, 265 
Reye, 403 n. 

Riemann, 266 

Right and left, 223 m., 231, 417 
Rigidity, 405 

Rotation, absolute, 489 ff. 

Schroder, 10n., 12n., 13, 22, 24, 26, 142, 
201 n., 221 w., 232, 306 m., 320 m., 367 m. 
Segments, 271, 359; and limitH, 292; 
completed, 289, 303; of compact series, 
299-302; of well-ordered series, 314 n.; 
infinitesimal, 334, 353, 368; in projective 
geometry, 385 ff. ; in descriptive geometry, 
394, 397 

Semi-continuum, 320 
Separation. See Couples 



534 


Index 


Series, 199; compact, 193 n., 903, 259, 271, 
277,287,289,299-303; closed, 202, 204, 205, 
234-238, 297 , 381, 387 ; infinite, 204, 239 ; 
denumerable, 296, 298 ; continuous, 205, 
271, 287 ff.; well-ordered, 310, 319 , 322, 
303 ; independent, 262 ; by correlation, 
262, 363; complete, 269, 303; perfect, 
273, 288, 290, 292 , 297 ; coherent, 274, 
2H3, 297; cohesive, 288 ; fundamental, 
283, 297 ; simple and multiple, 372 ; and 
distance, 204 ; and triangular relations, 204 
Sheaves, 400 

Sign, difference of, 227-233 
Similarity, of classes, 113 , 249, 261, 305, 
356; of null-classes, 521; of whole and 
part, see Pint 
Simplification, 16 

Some, distinguished front a, 56?*., 59 
Space, 872, 436, 442 ; an infinite aggregate, 
143, 443, 455; absolute, 227, 445 IT. ; 
finite and infinite, 403; continuity of, 
437-444; subjective? 446; empty, 446, 
449, 465; & priori? 454; and existence, 
vii, 458, 461 

Spaoes, projective, defined, 430 ; Euclidean, 
defined, 432; Clifford's, defined, 434 
Spinoza, 221, 418 

Staudt, von, 199, 216, 333, 384, 385?/., 421, 
427 ?*. 

Stolz, 90, 282 , 283 a., 334, 336, 378«., 379 

Straight lines, elliptic, *205; projective, 
382 ff., 387, 391; segments of projective, 
385; descriptive, 394-398; segments of 
descriptive, 394, 397 ; ideal, 400, 

402; metrical, 410; kinds of, 382, 391; 
and distance, 410, 492 
Streintz, 491 

Stretch, 181, 182 ?*., 230, 254, 288, 342, 353, 
408 ff., 425 

Sub classes, number contained in a given 
class, 366, 527 

Subject, and predicate, 47, 54, 77, 95, 211, 
2*21, 448, 451, 471; logical, can it be 
plural? 69, 76, 132, 136, 516 
Substance, 43, 471 
Substantives, 42 

Such that, 3, 11, 19, 20 , 28, 79, 82 
Sum, logical, 21 ; relative, 26 
Superposition, 161, 405 
Syllogism, 10, 16 , 21, 30, 457 
System, singly infinite, *245, 247 

Tautology, law of, 23 
Terms, 43 , 55/?., 152, *211, 448, 471, 522; 
of a proposition, 46 , 95, 211 ; combina- 
tions of, 55, 66 ; simple and complex, 
137; of a whole, 143 ; principal, in a 
series, 297 ; four classes of, 465 ; car- 
dinal number of, 362, 3GG 
Tetrahedra, 387, 399 
Than, 100 
The, 62 


Therefore, 86, 504 

Things, 44 , 106, 466, 505; and change, 471 
Time, an infinite aggregate, 144 ; relational 
theory of, 265 ; Kant's theory of, 456, 458 
Totality, 362, 368, 528 
Transcendental Aesthetic, 259 ; Dialectic, 259 
Triangles, 387, 398 
Trios, 525 

Tristram Shandy, paradox of, 358 
Truth, 3, 35, 48, 504 
Truth-values, 502, 519 
Two, 135; not mental, 451 
Types, logical, 103, 104, 107, 131, 130 n., 
367, 368, 521, 523-528; minimum, 524, 
525; mixed, 524, 5*26; number of, 525; 
of infinite order, 525 
Types, ordinal, 261, 321 

Unequal, 160 n. 

Unit, 136, 140; material, 468 
Unities, 139, 442; infinite, 144, 223 n.; 
organic, 466 

Vacuum, 468 

Vaihinger, 446?*., 456 

Vailati, 205, 215, 235, 393?*., 394, 395, 413 

Validity, 450 

Variable, 5, 6, 19, 89-94, 107, 264; 
apparent and real, 13; range of, 36, 
518; as concept, 86; and generality, 
90; in Arithmetic, 90; does not vary, 90, 
344, 351 ; restricted, 90; conjunctive and 
disjunctive, 92 ; individuality of, 94 ; in- 
dependent, *263 
Vectors, 432 
Velocity, 473, 482 

Verbs, 20 a., 4*2, 47-52, 106; and relations, 
49, 526 
Vieta, 157 

Vivanti, 203?/., 288?*., 307?*., 308 
Volumes, 231, 333, 417, 440, 443 

Ward, 474. 489 

Weierstrass, 111, 157, 259, 326, 347, 473; 
on irrationals, 2*>2 

Whitehead, vi, viii, 119, 253 w., 299 n., 
307?*., 308, 311?*., 322, 376 n., 377, 
424 «., 426 

Wholes, 77, 137 ; distinct from classes as 
many, 69, 132, 134 ?t. ; and logical 
prioiity, 137, 147; two kinds of, 138; 
distinct from all their parts, 140, 141, 
225; infinite, 143-148, 333, 349; always 
either aggregates or unities? 146, 440, 
460 ; collective and distributive, 348 ; 
and enumeration, 360 

Zeno, 347 ff., 355, 358 
Zero, 168, 195, 356; Meinong’s theory of, 
184, 187 ; as minimum, 185; of distance, 
186; as null-segment, 186, 273; and 
negation, 186, 187; and existence, 187 
Zermelo, 306 w. 



GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 
London: 40 Museum Street, W.C.i 


Auckland: 24 Wyndham Street 
Bombay: 15 Graham Road , Ballard Estate , Bombay 1 
Calcutta: ry Chittaranjan Avenue , Calcutta 13 
Cape Town: log Long Street 
Karachi: Maroon Chambers , South Napier Road , Karachi 2 
New Delhi: 13-14 Ajmeri Gate Extension , New Delhi 1 
Sao Paulo: Avenida 9 de Julho 1138 Ap . 5/ 

Sydney , N.S. W. : Bradbury House, 55 York Street 
Toronto: 9/ Wellington Street West 


BERTRAND RUSSELL 


The Impact of Science on Society 

‘A joy to read and full of the juiciest meat’. — sir george Thomson 
in The Daily Telegraph . 

‘Lord Russell celebrates his eightieth birthday with a most 
beautifully written study which shows him at the height of his 
powers ’. — Liverpool Daily Post . 


Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. net 


New Hopes for a Changing World 

‘A charming book . . . To read him is to take part for the moment in 
the life of reason which, according to philosophers less optimistic 
than Russell, is the only consolation in our vale of tears’. — 

Manchester Guardian . 

Cr. 8 vo. 2nd Impression. 12s. t)d. nel 


Human Society in Ethics and Politics 

The major political problems are now of so vital a nature that viewed 
in their contemporary context they excite emotions which sweep 
aside objective opinions. Bertrand Russell by setting our actual 
problems in the large impersonal framework of ethics hopes that 
they can be viewed with less heat and less fanaticism. He devotes the 
first half of his book to an undogmatic restatement of ethical beliefs 
and feelings, and the second half to applying this ethic to current 
political problems. He does not attempt to deal fully with the theory 
of politics, but only where it is closely related to ethics, and is of 
urgent practical importance now. 

Demy 8vo. 15s. net. 


GEORGE ALLEN AND UNWIN LIMITED 






